1 In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.
2 Now the earth was formless and desolate, and there was darkness upon the surface of the watery deep, and God’s active force was moving about over the surface of the waters.
3 And God said: “Let there be light.” Then there was light.
4 After that God saw that the light was good, and God began to divide the light from the darkness.
5 God called the light Day, but the darkness he called Night. And there was evening and there was morning, a first day.
6 Then God said: “Let there be an expanse between the waters, and let there be a division between the waters and the waters.”
7 Then God went on to make the expanse and divided the waters beneath the expanse from the waters above the expanse. And it was so.
8 God called the expanse Heaven. And there was evening and there was morning, a second day.
9 Then God said: “Let the waters under the heavens be collected together into one place, and let the dry land appear.” And it was so.
10 God called the dry land Earth, but the collecting of the waters, he called Seas. And God saw that it was good.
11 Then God said: “Let the earth cause grass to sprout, seed-bearing plants and fruit trees according to their kinds, yielding fruit along with seed on the earth.” And it was so.
12 And the earth began to produce grass, seed-bearing plants and trees yielding fruit along with seed, according to their kinds. Then God saw that it was good.
13 And there was evening and there was morning, a third day.
14 Then God said: “Let there be luminaries in the expanse of the heavens to make a division between the day and the night, and they will serve as signs for seasons and for days and years.
15 They will serve as luminaries in the expanse of the heavens to shine upon the earth.” And it was so.
16 And God went on to make the two great luminaries, the greater luminary for dominating the day and the lesser luminary for dominating the night, and also the stars.
17 Thus God put them in the expanse of the heavens to shine upon the earth
18 and to dominate by day and by night and to make a division between the light and the darkness. Then God saw that it was good.
19 And there was evening and there was morning, a fourth day.
20 Then God said: “Let the waters swarm with living creatures, and let flying creatures fly above the earth across the expanse of the heavens.”
21 And God created the great sea creatures and all living creatures that move and swarm in the waters according to their kinds and every winged flying creature according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.
22 With that God blessed them, saying: “Be fruitful and become many and fill the waters of the sea, and let the flying creatures become many in the earth.”
23 And there was evening and there was morning, a fifth day.
24 Then God said: “Let the earth bring forth living creatures according to their kinds, domestic animals and creeping animals and wild animals of the earth according to their kinds.” And it was so.
25 And God went on to make the wild animals of the earth according to their kinds and the domestic animals according to their kinds and all the creeping animals of the ground according to their kinds. And God saw that it was good.
26 Then God said: “Let us make man in our image, according to our likeness, and let them have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and the domestic animals and all the earth and every creeping animal that is moving on the earth.”
27 And God went on to create the man in his image, in God’s image he created him; male and female he created them.
28 Further, God blessed them, and God said to them: “Be fruitful and become many, fill the earth and subdue it, and have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and every living creature that is moving on the earth.”
29 Then God said: “Here I have given to you every seed-bearing plant that is on the entire earth and every tree with seed-bearing fruit. Let them serve as food for you.
30 And to every wild animal of the earth and to every flying creature of the heavens and to everything moving on the earth in which there is life, I have given all green vegetation for food.” And it was so.
31 After that God saw everything he had made, and look! it was very good. And there was evening and there was morning, a sixth day.
2 Thus the heavens and the earth and everything in them were completed.
2 And by the seventh day, God had completed the work that he had been doing, and he began to rest on the seventh day from all his work that he had been doing.
3 And God went on to bless the seventh day and to declare it sacred, for on it God has been resting from all the work that he has created, all that he purposed to make.
4 This is a history of the heavens and the earth in the time they were created, in the day that Jehovah God made earth and heaven.
5 No bush of the field was yet on the earth and no vegetation of the field had begun sprouting, because Jehovah God had not made it rain on the earth and there was no man to cultivate the ground.
6 But a mist would go up from the earth, and it watered the entire surface of the ground.
7 And Jehovah God went on to form the man out of dust from the ground and to blow into his nostrils the breath of life, and the man became a living person.
8 Further, Jehovah God planted a garden in Eʹden, toward the east; and there he put the man whom he had formed.
9 Thus Jehovah God made to grow out of the ground every tree that was pleasing to look at and good for food and also the tree of life in the middle of the garden and the tree of the knowledge of good and bad.
10 Now there was a river flowing out of Eʹden to water the garden, and from there it divided into four rivers.
11 The name of the first is Piʹshon; it is the one encircling the entire land of Havʹi·lah, where there is gold.
12 The gold of that land is good. Bdellium gum and onyx stone are also there.
13 The name of the second river is Giʹhon; it is the one encircling the entire land of Cush.
14 The name of the third river is Hidʹde·kel; it is the one going to the east of As·syrʹi·a. And the fourth river is the Eu·phraʹtes.
15 Jehovah God took the man and settled him in the garden of Eʹden to cultivate it and to take care of it.
16 Jehovah God also gave this command to the man: “From every tree of the garden you may eat to satisfaction.
17 But as for the tree of the knowledge of good and bad, you must not eat from it, for in the day you eat from it you will certainly die.”
18 Then Jehovah God said: “It is not good for the man to continue to be alone. I am going to make a helper for him, as a complement of him.”
19 Now Jehovah God had been forming from the ground every wild animal of the field and every flying creature of the heavens, and he began bringing them to the man to see what he would call each one; and whatever the man would call each living creature, that became its name.
20 So the man named all the domestic animals and the flying creatures of the heavens and every wild animal of the field, but for man there was no helper as a complement of him.
21 So Jehovah God caused the man to fall into a deep sleep, and while he was sleeping, he took one of his ribs and then closed up the flesh over its place.
22 And Jehovah God built the rib that he had taken from the man into a woman, and he brought her to the man.
23 Then the man said: “This is at last bone of my bones And flesh of my flesh. This one will be called Woman, Because from man she was taken.”
24 That is why a man will leave his father and his mother and he will stick to his wife, and they will become one flesh.
25 And both of them continued to be naked, the man and his wife; yet they were not ashamed.
3 Now the serpent was the most cautious of all the wild animals of the field that Jehovah God had made. So it said to the woman: “Did God really say that you must not eat from every tree of the garden?”
2 At this the woman said to the serpent: “We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden.
3 But God has said about the fruit of the tree that is in the middle of the garden: ‘You must not eat from it, no, you must not touch it; otherwise you will die.’”
4 At this the serpent said to the woman: “You certainly will not die.
5 For God knows that in the very day you eat from it, your eyes will be opened and you will be like God, knowing good and bad.”
6 Consequently, the woman saw that the tree was good for food and that it was something desirable to the eyes, yes, the tree was pleasing to look at. So she began taking of its fruit and eating it. Afterward, she also gave some to her husband when he was with her, and he began eating it.
7 Then the eyes of both of them were opened, and they realized that they were naked. So they sewed fig leaves together and made loin coverings for themselves.
8 Later they heard the voice of Jehovah God as he was walking in the garden about the breezy part of the day, and the man and his wife hid from the face of Jehovah God among the trees of the garden.
9 And Jehovah God kept calling to the man and saying to him: “Where are you?”
10 Finally he said: “I heard your voice in the garden, but I was afraid because I was naked, so I hid myself.”
11 At that he said: “Who told you that you were naked? Have you eaten from the tree from which I commanded you not to eat?”
12 The man said: “The woman whom you gave to be with me, she gave me fruit from the tree, so I ate.”
13 Jehovah God then said to the woman: “What is this you have done?” The woman replied: “The serpent deceived me, so I ate.”
14 Then Jehovah God said to the serpent: “Because you have done this, you are the cursed one out of all the domestic animals and out of all the wild animals of the field. On your belly you will go, and you will eat dust all the days of your life.
15 And I will put enmity between you and the woman and between your offspring and her offspring. He will crush your head, and you will strike him in the heel.”
16 To the woman he said: “I will greatly increase the pain of your pregnancy; in pain you will give birth to children, and your longing will be for your husband, and he will dominate you.”
17 And to Adam he said: “Because you listened to your wife’s voice and ate from the tree concerning which I gave you this command, ‘You must not eat from it,’ cursed is the ground on your account. In pain you will eat its produce all the days of your life.
18 It will grow thorns and thistles for you, and you must eat the vegetation of the field.
19 In the sweat of your face you will eat bread until you return to the ground, for out of it you were taken. For dust you are and to dust you will return.”
20 After this Adam named his wife Eve, because she was to become the mother of everyone living.
21 And Jehovah God made long garments from skins for Adam and for his wife, to clothe them.
22 Jehovah God then said: “Here the man has become like one of us in knowing good and bad. Now in order that he may not put his hand out and take fruit also from the tree of life and eat and live forever,—”
23 With that Jehovah God expelled him from the garden of Eʹden to cultivate the ground from which he had been taken.
24 So he drove the man out, and he posted at the east of the garden of Eʹden the cherubs and the flaming blade of a sword that was turning continuously to guard the way to the tree of life.
10 This is the history of Noah’s sons, Shem, Ham, and Jaʹpheth. Sons were born to them after the Flood.
2 The sons of Jaʹpheth were Goʹmer, Maʹgog, Maʹda·i, Jaʹvan, Tuʹbal, Meʹshech, and Tiʹras.
3 The sons of Goʹmer were Ashʹke·naz, Riʹphath, and To·garʹmah.
4 The sons of Jaʹvan were E·liʹshah, Tarʹshish, Kitʹtim, and Doʹda·nim.
5 From these the inhabitants of the islands spread into their lands, according to their languages and their families and by their nations.
6 The sons of Ham were Cush, Mizʹra·im, Put, and Caʹnaan.
7 The sons of Cush were Seʹba, Havʹi·lah, Sabʹtah, Raʹa·mah, and Sabʹte·ca. The sons of Raʹa·mah were Sheʹba and Deʹdan.
8 Cush became father to Nimʹrod. He was the first to become a mighty one on the earth.
9 He became a mighty hunter in opposition to Jehovah. That is why there is a saying: “Just like Nimʹrod, a mighty hunter in opposition to Jehovah.”
10 The beginning of his kingdom was Baʹbel, Eʹrech, Acʹcad, and Calʹneh, in the land of Shiʹnar.
11 From that land he went into As·syrʹi·a and built Ninʹe·veh, Re·hoʹboth-Ir, Caʹlah,
12 and Reʹsen, between Ninʹe·veh and Caʹlah: This is the great city.
13 Mizʹra·im became father to Luʹdim, Anʹa·mim, Le·haʹbim, Naph·tuʹhim,
14 Path·ruʹsim, Cas·luʹhim (from whom the Phi·lisʹtines came), and Caphʹto·rim.
15 Caʹnaan became father to Siʹdon, his firstborn, and Heth,
16 as well as the Jebʹu·site, the Amʹor·ite, the Girʹga·shite,
17 the Hiʹvite, the Arkʹite, the Siʹnite,
18 the Arʹvad·ite, the Zemʹa·rite, and the Haʹmath·ite. Afterward, the families of the Caʹnaan·ites were scattered.
19 So the boundary of the Caʹnaan·ites was from Siʹdon as far as Geʹrar, near Gazʹa, as far as Sodʹom, Go·morʹrah, Adʹmah, and Ze·boiʹim, near Laʹsha.
20 These were the sons of Ham according to their families and their languages, by their lands and their nations.
21 Children were also born to Shem, the forefather of all the sons of Eʹber and the brother of Jaʹpheth the oldest.
22 The sons of Shem were Eʹlam, Asʹshur, Ar·pachʹshad, Lud, and Aʹram.
23 The sons of Aʹram were Uz, Hul, Geʹther, and Mash.
24 Ar·pachʹshad became father to Sheʹlah, and Sheʹlah became father to Eʹber.
25 Two sons were born to Eʹber. The name of the one was Peʹleg, because in his lifetime the earth was divided. The name of his brother was Jokʹtan.
26 Jokʹtan became father to Al·moʹdad, Sheʹleph, Ha·zar·maʹveth, Jeʹrah,
27 Ha·doʹram, Uʹzal, Dikʹlah,
28 Oʹbal, A·bimʹa·el, Sheʹba,
29 Oʹphir, Havʹi·lah, and Joʹbab; all of these were the sons of Jokʹtan.
30 Their place of dwelling extended from Meʹsha as far as Seʹphar, the mountainous region of the East.
31 These were the sons of Shem according to their families and their languages, by their lands and their nations.
32 These were the families of the sons of Noah according to their family lines and by their nations. From these the nations were spread abroad in the earth after the Flood.
13 Aʹbram then went up out of Egypt to the Negʹeb, he and his wife and all that he had, together with Lot.
2 Aʹbram was very rich in livestock, silver, and gold.
3 He camped in one place after another as he traveled from the Negʹeb to Bethʹel, until he arrived at the place where his tent had been between Bethʹel and Aʹi,
4 to the place where he had previously built an altar. There Aʹbram called on the name of Jehovah.
5 Now Lot, who was traveling with Aʹbram, also owned sheep, cattle, and tents.
6 So the land did not allow for all of them to stay in the same place; their goods had become so many that they could no longer dwell together.
7 As a result, a quarrel arose between the herders of Aʹbram’s livestock and the herders of Lot’s livestock. (At that time the Caʹnaan·ites and the Perʹiz·zites were dwelling in the land.)
8 So Aʹbram said to Lot: “Please, there should be no quarreling between me and you and between my herdsmen and your herdsmen, for we are brothers.
9 Is not the whole land available to you? Please, separate from me. If you go to the left, then I will go to the right; but if you go to the right, then I will go to the left.”
10 So Lot raised his eyes and saw that the whole district of the Jordan was a well-watered region (before Jehovah destroyed Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah), like the garden of Jehovah, like the land of Egypt, as far as Zoʹar.
11 Then Lot chose for himself the whole district of the Jordan, and Lot moved his camp to the east. So they separated from each other.
12 Aʹbram lived in the land of Caʹnaan, but Lot lived among the cities of the district. Finally he set up his tent near Sodʹom.
13 Now the men of Sodʹom were wicked, gross sinners against Jehovah.
14 Jehovah said to Aʹbram, after Lot had separated from him: “Raise your eyes, please, and look from the place where you are, to the north and south, east and west,
15 because all the land that you see, I will give to you and your offspring as a lasting possession.
16 And I will make your offspring like the dust particles of the earth, so that if anyone could count the dust particles of the earth, then your offspring could be counted.
17 Get up, travel through the length and breadth of the land, for to you I am going to give it.”
18 So Aʹbram continued to live in tents. Later he came and dwelled among the big trees of Mamʹre, which are in Hebʹron, and there he built an altar to Jehovah.
19 The two angels arrived at Sodʹom by evening, and Lot was sitting in the gate of Sodʹom. When Lot saw them, he got up to meet them and bowed down with his face to the earth.
2 And he said: “Please, my lords, turn aside, please, into the house of your servant and stay overnight and have your feet washed. Then you may get up early and travel on your way.” To this they said: “No, we will stay overnight in the public square.”
3 But he was so insistent with them that they went with him to his house. Then he made a feast for them, and he baked unleavened bread, and they ate.
4 Before they could lie down to sleep, the men of the city—the men of Sodʹom from boy to old man, all of them—surrounded the house in one mob.
5 And they kept calling out to Lot and saying to him: “Where are the men who came in to you tonight? Bring them out to us so that we may have sex with them.”
6 Then Lot went out to them to the doorway, and he shut the door behind him.
7 He said: “Please, my brothers, do not act wickedly.
8 Please, here I have two daughters who have never had sexual relations with a man. Please, let me bring them out to you for you to do to them whatever seems good to you. But do not do anything to these men, for they have come under the shelter of my roof.”
9 At this they said: “Stand back!” And they added: “This lone foreigner came to live here, and yet he dares to judge us! Now we are going to do worse to you than to them.” And they crowded in on Lot and moved forward to break down the door.
10 So the men reached out their hands and brought Lot into the house with them, and they shut the door.
11 But they struck the men who were at the entrance of the house with blindness, from the least to the greatest, so that they wore themselves out trying to find the doorway.
12 Then the men said to Lot: “Do you have anyone else here? Sons-in-law, your sons, your daughters, and all your people in the city, bring out of this place!
13 For we are going to destroy this place, because the outcry against them has indeed grown great before Jehovah, so that Jehovah sent us to destroy the city.”
14 So Lot went out and began to speak to his sons-in-law who were to marry his daughters, and he kept saying: “Get up! Get out of this place, because Jehovah will destroy the city!” But to his sons-in-law, he seemed to be joking.
15 As dawn was breaking, the angels became urgent with Lot, saying: “Get up! Take your wife and your two daughters who are here with you, so that you will not be swept away in the error of the city!”
16 When he kept lingering, then because of Jehovah’s compassion for him, the men seized hold of his hand and the hand of his wife and the hands of his two daughters, and they brought him out and stationed him outside the city.
17 As soon as they had brought them to the outskirts, he said: “Escape for your life! Do not look behind you and do not stand still in any part of the district! Escape to the mountainous region so that you may not be swept away!”
18 Then Lot said to them: “Not there, please, Jehovah!
19 Please, now, your servant has found favor in your eyes and you are showing great kindness to me by preserving me alive, but I am not able to flee to the mountainous region because I am afraid that disaster may overtake me and I will die.
20 Please, now, this town is nearby and I can flee there; it is only a small place. May I, please, escape there? It is only a small place. Then I will survive.”
21 So he said to him: “Very well, I will also show you consideration by not overthrowing the town you speak of.
22 Hurry! Escape there, because I cannot do anything until you arrive there!” That is why he named the town Zoʹar.
23 The sun had risen over the land when Lot arrived at Zoʹar.
24 Then Jehovah made it rain sulfur and fire on Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah—it came from Jehovah, from the heavens.
25 So he overthrew these cities, yes, the entire district, including all the inhabitants of the cities and the plants of the ground.
26 But Lot’s wife, who was behind him, began to look back, and she became a pillar of salt.
27 Now Abraham got up early in the morning and went to the place where he had stood before Jehovah.
28 When he looked down toward Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah and all the land of the district, he saw quite a sight. There was dense smoke rising from the land like the dense smoke of a kiln!
29 So when God destroyed the cities of the district, God kept Abraham in mind by sending Lot out from the cities he overthrew, the cities where Lot had been dwelling.
30 Later Lot went up from Zoʹar with his two daughters and began living in the mountainous region, because he was afraid to live in Zoʹar. So he began living in a cave with his two daughters.
31 And the firstborn said to the younger: “Our father is old, and there is not a man in the land to have relations with us according to the custom of the whole earth.
32 Come, let us give our father wine to drink, and let us lie down with him and preserve offspring from our father.”
33 So that night they kept giving their father wine to drink; then the firstborn went in and lay down with her father, but he did not know when she lay down and when she got up.
34 Then on the next day, the firstborn said to the younger: “Here I lay down with my father last night. Let us give him wine to drink tonight also. Then you go in and lie down with him, and let us preserve offspring from our father.”
35 So that night also, they repeatedly gave their father wine to drink; then the younger went and lay down with him, but he did not know when she lay down and when she got up.
36 So both daughters of Lot became pregnant by their father.
37 The firstborn gave birth to a son and named him Moʹab. He is the father of the Moʹab·ites of today.
38 The younger also gave birth to a son, and she named him Ben-amʹmi. He is the father of the Amʹmon·ites of today.
20 Now Abraham moved his camp from there to the land of the Negʹeb and began dwelling between Kaʹdesh and Shur. While he was residing at Geʹrar,
2 Abraham repeated concerning his wife Sarah: “She is my sister.” So A·bimʹe·lech king of Geʹrar sent for Sarah and took her.
3 Afterward, God came by night to A·bimʹe·lech in a dream and said to him: “Here you are as good as dead because of the woman whom you have taken, since she is married and belongs to another man.”
4 However, A·bimʹe·lech had not gone near her. So he said: “Jehovah, will you kill a nation that is really innocent?
5 Did he not say to me, ‘She is my sister,’ and did she too not say, ‘He is my brother’? I did this with an honest heart and innocent hands.”
6 Then the true God said to him in the dream: “I know that you did this with an honest heart, so I held you back from sinning against me. That is why I did not allow you to touch her.
7 Now return the man’s wife, for he is a prophet, and he will make supplication for you and you will keep living. But if you are not returning her, know that you will surely die, you and all who are yours.”
8 A·bimʹe·lech got up early in the morning and called all his servants and told them all these things, and they became very frightened.
9 Then A·bimʹe·lech called Abraham and said to him: “What have you done to us? What sin have I committed against you that you would bring upon me and my kingdom such a great sin? What you have done to me was not right.”
10 And A·bimʹe·lech went on to say to Abraham: “What were your intentions when you did this thing?”
11 Abraham said: “It was because I said to myself, ‘Surely there is no fear of God in this place, and they will kill me because of my wife.’
12 And besides, she really is my sister, the daughter of my father but not the daughter of my mother, and she became my wife.
13 So when God caused me to wander from the house of my father, I said to her: ‘Let this be how you show loyal love to me: Everywhere we go, say of me, “He is my brother.”’”
14 A·bimʹe·lech then took sheep and cattle and male and female servants and gave them to Abraham, and he returned his wife Sarah to him.
15 A·bimʹe·lech also said: “Here my land is available to you. Dwell wherever you please.”
16 And to Sarah he said: “Here I give 1,000 pieces of silver to your brother. It is a sign of your innocence to all who are with you and before everybody, and you are cleared of reproach.”
17 And Abraham began to make supplication to the true God, and God healed A·bimʹe·lech and his wife and his slave girls, and they began having children;
18 for Jehovah had made all the women of the house of A·bimʹe·lech barren because of Sarah, Abraham’s wife.
22 Now after this the true God put Abraham to the test, and he said to him: “Abraham!” to which he replied: “Here I am!”
2 Then he said: “Take, please, your son, your only son whom you so love, Isaac, and travel to the land of Mo·riʹah and offer him up there as a burnt offering on one of the mountains that I will designate to you.”
3 So Abraham got up early in the morning and saddled his donkey and took two of his servants along with him and his son Isaac. He split the wood for the burnt offering, and then he rose and traveled to the place that the true God indicated to him.
4 On the third day, Abraham looked up and saw the place from a distance.
5 Abraham now said to his servants: “You stay here with the donkey, but the boy and I will go over there and worship and return to you.”
6 So Abraham took the wood for the burnt offering and put it on his son Isaac. Then he took in his hands the fire and the knife, and the two of them walked on together.
7 Then Isaac said to his father Abraham: “My father!” He replied: “Yes, my son!” So he continued: “Here are the fire and the wood, but where is the sheep for the burnt offering?”
8 To this Abraham said: “God himself will provide the sheep for the burnt offering, my son.” And both of them walked on together.
9 Finally they reached the place that the true God had indicated to him, and Abraham built an altar there and arranged the wood on it. He bound his son Isaac hand and foot and put him on the altar on top of the wood.
10 Then Abraham reached out his hand and took the knife to kill his son.
11 But Jehovah’s angel called to him from the heavens and said: “Abraham, Abraham!” to which he answered: “Here I am!”
12 Then he said: “Do not harm the boy, and do not do anything at all to him, for now I do know that you are God-fearing because you have not withheld your son, your only one, from me.”
13 At that Abraham looked up, and there just beyond him was a ram caught by its horns in a thicket. So Abraham went and took the ram and offered it up as a burnt offering in place of his son.
14 And Abraham named that place Je·hoʹvah-jiʹreh. This is why it is still said today: “In the mountain of Jehovah it will be provided.”
15 And Jehovah’s angel called to Abraham a second time from the heavens,
16 saying: “‘By myself I swear,’ declares Jehovah, ‘that because you have done this and you have not withheld your son, your only one,
17 I will surely bless you and I will surely multiply your offspring like the stars of the heavens and like the grains of sand on the seashore, and your offspring will take possession of the gate of his enemies.
18 And by means of your offspring all nations of the earth will obtain a blessing for themselves because you have listened to my voice.’”
19 After that Abraham returned to his servants, and they got up and went back together to Beʹer-sheʹba; and Abraham continued to dwell at Beʹer-sheʹba.
20 After this it was reported to Abraham: “Here Milʹcah has also borne sons to Naʹhor your brother:
21 Uz his firstborn, Buz his brother, Kem·uʹel the father of Aʹram,
22 Cheʹsed, Haʹzo, Pilʹdash, Jidʹlaph, and Be·thuʹel.”
23 Be·thuʹel became the father of Re·bekʹah. Milʹcah bore these eight to Naʹhor the brother of Abraham.
24 His concubine, whose name was Reuʹmah, also bore sons: Teʹbah, Gaʹham, Taʹhash, and Maʹa·cah.
24 Abraham was now old, advanced in years, and Jehovah had blessed Abraham in everything.
2 Abraham said to his servant, the oldest one of his household, who was managing all he had: “Please put your hand under my thigh,
3 and I will make you swear by Jehovah, the God of the heavens and the God of the earth, that you will not take a wife for my son from the daughters of the Caʹnaan·ites, among whom I am dwelling.
4 You must go instead to my country and to my relatives and take a wife for my son, for Isaac.”
5 However, the servant said to him: “What if the woman is not willing to come with me to this land? Must I then return your son to the land from which you came?”
6 At this Abraham said to him: “See that you do not take my son there.
7 Jehovah the God of the heavens, who took me from my father’s house and from the land of my relatives and who spoke with me and swore to me: ‘To your offspring I am going to give this land,’ he will send his angel ahead of you, and you will certainly take a wife for my son from there.
8 But if the woman is unwilling to come with you, you will be free from this oath. But you must not take my son there.”
9 With that the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master and swore to him concerning this matter.
10 So the servant took ten of his master’s camels and departed, taking along all sorts of good things from his master. Then he went on his way to Mes·o·po·taʹmi·a, to the city of Naʹhor.
11 He had the camels kneel down at a well of water outside the city. It was about evening, the time when the women would go out to draw water.
12 Then he said: “Jehovah the God of my master Abraham, please grant me success this day, and show your loyal love to my master Abraham.
13 Here I am standing at a spring of water, and the daughters of the men of the city are coming out to draw water.
14 May it happen that the young woman to whom I say, ‘Please let down your water jar so that I may take a drink,’ and who replies, ‘Take a drink, and I will also water your camels,’ let this be the one you choose for your servant Isaac; and by this let me know that you have shown your loyal love to my master.”
15 Even before he finished speaking, Re·bekʹah, who was the daughter of Be·thuʹel the son of Milʹcah the wife of Naʹhor, Abraham’s brother, came out with her water jar on her shoulder.
16 Now the young woman was very beautiful, a virgin; no man had had sexual relations with her. She went down to the spring, filled her water jar, and then came back up.
17 At once the servant ran to meet her and said: “Please give me a little sip of water from your jar.”
18 In turn she said: “Drink, my lord.” With that she quickly lowered her jar upon her hand and gave him a drink.
19 When she finished giving him a drink, she said: “I will also draw water for your camels until they are done drinking.”
20 So she quickly emptied her jar into the drinking trough and ran again and again to the well to draw water, and she kept drawing water for all his camels.
21 The whole time the man silently stared at her in amazement, wondering whether Jehovah had made his trip successful or not.
22 When the camels had finished drinking, the man took out for her a gold nose ring weighing a half shekel and two bracelets of gold weighing ten shekels,
23 and he said: “Please tell me, whose daughter are you? Is there any room at your father’s house for us to spend the night?”
24 At that she said to him: “I am the daughter of Be·thuʹel the son of Milʹcah, whom she bore to Naʹhor.”
25 And she added: “We have both straw and much fodder and also a place to spend the night.”
26 Then the man bowed down and prostrated himself before Jehovah
27 and said: “May Jehovah be praised, the God of my master Abraham, for he has not abandoned his loyal love and his faithfulness toward my master. Jehovah has guided me to the house of the brothers of my master.”
28 And the young woman ran to tell her mother’s household about these things.
29 Now Re·bekʹah had a brother whose name was Laʹban. So Laʹban ran to the man who was outside at the spring.
30 When he saw the nose ring and the bracelets on the hands of his sister and heard the words of his sister Re·bekʹah, who was saying, “This is the way the man spoke to me,” he came to meet the man, who was still there standing by the camels at the spring.
31 At once he said: “Come, you who are blessed by Jehovah. Why do you keep standing out here? I have made the house ready and a place for the camels.”
32 With that the man came into the house, and he unharnessed the camels and gave straw and fodder to the camels and water to wash his feet and the feet of the men who were with him.
33 However, when something to eat was set before him, he said: “I will not eat until I have told you what I have to say.” So Laʹban said: “Speak!”
34 Then he said: “I am Abraham’s servant.
35 And Jehovah has blessed my master very much, and he has made him very wealthy by giving him sheep and cattle, silver and gold, male and female servants, and camels and donkeys.
36 Further, Sarah the wife of my master bore a son to my master after she grew old, and he will give him everything he has.
37 So my master made me swear, saying: ‘You must not take a wife for my son from the daughters of the Caʹnaan·ites, in whose land I am dwelling.
38 No, but you will go to the house of my father and to my family, and you must take a wife for my son.’
39 But I said to my master: ‘What if the woman is unwilling to come with me?’
40 He said to me: ‘Jehovah, before whom I have walked, will send his angel with you and will certainly give success to your journey, and you must take a wife for my son from my family and from the house of my father.
41 You will be released from your oath to me if you go to my family and they will not give her to you. This will release you from your oath.’
42 “When I got to the spring today, I said: ‘Jehovah the God of my master Abraham, if you will make my journey successful,
43 here I am standing at a spring. What must take place is that when a young woman comes out to draw water, I will say, “Please, let me drink a little water from your jar,”
44 and she will say to me, “You take a drink, and I will also draw water for your camels.” Let that woman be the one whom Jehovah has chosen for the son of my master.’
45 “Before I was finished speaking in my heart, there was Re·bekʹah coming out with her jar on her shoulder, and she made her way down to the spring and began to draw water. Then I said to her: ‘Give me a drink, please.’
46 So she quickly lowered her jar from her shoulder and said: ‘Take a drink, and I will also water your camels.’ Then I took a drink, and she also watered the camels.
47 After that I asked her, ‘Whose daughter are you?’ to which she replied, ‘The daughter of Be·thuʹel the son of Naʹhor, whom Milʹcah bore to him.’ So I put the ring on her nose and the bracelets on her hands.
48 And I bowed down and prostrated myself before Jehovah and praised Jehovah the God of my master Abraham, who had led me on the right path to take the daughter of the brother of my master for his son.
49 And now tell me if you wish to show loyal love and faithfulness toward my master; but if not, tell me, so that I may proceed one way or the other.”
50 Then Laʹban and Be·thuʹel answered: “This is from Jehovah. We are not able to say yes or no to you.
51 Here is Re·bekʹah before you. Take her and go, and let her become a wife to the son of your master, just as Jehovah has spoken.”
52 When Abraham’s servant heard their words, he at once bowed down on the ground before Jehovah.
53 And the servant began to bring out articles of silver and of gold and garments and to give them to Re·bekʹah, and he gave valuable things to her brother and to her mother.
54 After that he and the men with him ate and drank, and they spent the night there. When he got up in the morning, he said: “Send me off to my master.”
55 To this her brother and her mother said: “Let the young woman stay with us at least ten days. Then she can go.”
56 But he said to them: “Do not detain me, seeing that Jehovah has made my journey successful. Send me off, in order that I may go to my master.”
57 So they said: “Let us call the young woman and inquire of her.”
58 They called Re·bekʹah and said to her: “Will you go with this man?” She replied: “I am willing to go.”
59 So they sent off their sister Re·bekʹah and her nurse and Abraham’s servant and his men.
60 And they blessed Re·bekʹah and said to her: “Our sister, may you become thousands times ten thousand, and let your offspring take possession of the gate of those who hate them.”
61 Then Re·bekʹah and her female attendants rose, got on the camels, and followed the man. So the servant took Re·bekʹah and went on his way.
62 Now Isaac had come from the direction of Beʹer-laʹhai-roi, for he was dwelling in the land of the Negʹeb.
63 And Isaac was out walking in the field about nightfall to meditate. When he looked up, why, he saw that camels were coming!
64 When Re·bekʹah looked up, she caught sight of Isaac, and she quickly got down from the camel.
65 Then she asked the servant: “Who is that man there walking in the field to meet us?” And the servant said: “It is my master.” So she took her veil to cover herself.
66 And the servant told Isaac all the things he had done.
67 After that Isaac brought her into the tent of Sarah his mother. Thus he took Re·bekʹah as his wife; and he fell in love with her, and Isaac found comfort after the loss of his mother.
27 Now when Isaac was old and his eyes were too weak to see, he called Eʹsau his older son to him and said: “My son!” He replied: “Here I am!”
2 And he went on to say: “I have now grown old. I do not know the day of my death.
3 So at this time take, please, your weapons, your quiver and your bow, and go out to the field and hunt some wild game for me.
4 Then make the kind of tasty dish that I am fond of and bring it to me. Then I will eat it so that I may bless you before I die.”
5 However, Re·bekʹah was listening while Isaac spoke to Eʹsau his son. And Eʹsau went out into the field to hunt game and to bring it in.
6 And Re·bekʹah said to Jacob her son: “I just heard your father speaking to your brother Eʹsau, saying,
7 ‘Bring me some game and make me a tasty dish. Then let me eat so that I may bless you before Jehovah before my death.’
8 And now, my son, listen carefully and do what I am instructing you.
9 Go, please, to the herd and get me two of the best young goats from there so that I may prepare from them a tasty dish for your father, just the way he likes it.
10 Then take it to your father to eat, in order that he may bless you before his death.”
11 Jacob said to his mother Re·bekʹah: “But Eʹsau my brother is a hairy man, and my skin is smooth.
12 What if my father feels me? Then I will certainly appear to be mocking him, and I will bring upon myself a curse rather than a blessing.”
13 At this his mother said to him: “Upon me be the curse meant for you, my son. Just do as I say and go, get them for me.”
14 So he went and got them and brought them to his mother, and his mother made a tasty dish, just the way his father liked it.
15 After that Re·bekʹah took her older son Eʹsau’s finest garments, which she had in the house, and put them on her younger son Jacob.
16 She also put the skins of the young goats on his hands and on the hairless part of his neck.
17 Then she handed the tasty dish and the bread that she had made to her son Jacob.
18 So he went in to his father and said: “My father!” to which he said: “Here I am! Who are you, my son?”
19 Jacob said to his father: “I am Eʹsau your firstborn. I have done just as you told me. Sit up, please, and eat some of my game, so that you may bless me.”
20 At that Isaac said to his son: “How were you so quick in finding it, my son?” He replied: “Because Jehovah your God brought it to me.”
21 Then Isaac said to Jacob: “Come near, please, that I may feel you, my son, to know whether you are really my son Eʹsau or not.”
22 So Jacob came near to his father Isaac, and he felt him, after which he said: “The voice is the voice of Jacob, but the hands are the hands of Eʹsau.”
23 He did not recognize him because his hands were hairy like the hands of his brother Eʹsau. So he blessed him.
24 After that he asked: “Are you really my son Eʹsau?” to which he replied: “I am.”
25 Then he said: “Bring me some of the wild game for me to eat, my son, then I will bless you.” With that he brought it to him and he ate, and he brought him wine and he drank.
26 Then Isaac his father said to him: “Come near, please, and kiss me, my son.”
27 So he came near and kissed him, and he could smell the scent of his garments. Then he blessed him and said: “See, the scent of my son is like the scent of the field that Jehovah has blessed.
28 May the true God give you the dews of the heavens and the fertile soils of the earth and an abundance of grain and new wine.
29 Let peoples serve you, and let nations bow low to you. Be master over your brothers, and let the sons of your mother bow low to you. Cursed be everyone who curses you, and blessed be everyone who blesses you.”
30 Now Isaac had just finished blessing Jacob, and Jacob had barely left the presence of his father Isaac when his brother Eʹsau came back from his hunting.
31 He too prepared a tasty dish and brought it to his father, and he said to his father: “Let my father get up and eat some of his son’s game, in order that you may bless me.”
32 At this his father Isaac said to him: “Who are you?” to which he said: “I am your son, your firstborn, Eʹsau.”
33 And Isaac began to tremble violently, so he said: “Who was it, then, who hunted for game and brought it to me? I already ate it before you arrived, and I blessed him—and he will surely be blessed!”
34 On hearing his father’s words, Eʹsau began to cry out in an extremely loud and bitter manner and to say to his father: “Bless me, yes, me too, my father!”
35 But he said: “Your brother came deceitfully so that he might get the blessing meant for you.”
36 At this he said: “Is he not rightly named Jacob, that he might supplant me these two times? My birthright he has already taken, and now he has taken my blessing!” Then he added: “Have you not reserved a blessing for me?”
37 But Isaac answered Eʹsau: “Here I have appointed him master over you, and I have given him all his brothers as servants, and I have bestowed grain and new wine for his support. What is left that I can do for you, my son?”
38 Eʹsau said to his father: “Is there just one blessing that you have, my father? Bless me, yes, me too, my father!” With that Eʹsau cried loudly and burst into tears.
39 So his father Isaac answered him: “See, away from the fertile soils of the earth your dwelling will be, and away from the dew of the heavens above.
40 And by your sword you will live, and you will serve your brother. But when you grow restless, you will indeed break his yoke off your neck.”
41 However, Eʹsau harbored animosity against Jacob because of the blessing his father had given him, and Eʹsau kept saying in his heart: “The days of mourning for my father are getting closer. After that I am going to kill Jacob my brother.”
42 When the words of her older son Eʹsau were told to Re·bekʹah, she at once sent for her younger son Jacob and said to him: “Look! Your brother Eʹsau is planning to take revenge by killing you.
43 Now, my son, do as I say. Get up and run away to my brother Laʹban at Haʹran.
44 Dwell with him for a while until your brother’s rage calms down,
45 until your brother’s anger toward you subsides and he forgets what you have done to him. Then I will send for you from there. Why should I lose both of you in one day?”
46 After that Re·bekʹah kept saying to Isaac: “I am disgusted with my life because of the daughters of Heth. If Jacob ever takes a wife from the daughters of Heth, like these daughters of the land, what good is my life?”
28 So Isaac called Jacob and blessed him and commanded him, saying: “You must not take a wife from the daughters of Caʹnaan.
2 Go away to Padʹdan-aʹram to the house of Be·thuʹel, your mother’s father, and from there take for yourself a wife from the daughters of Laʹban, your mother’s brother.
3 God Almighty will bless you and make you fruitful and multiply you, and you will certainly become a congregation of peoples.
4 And he will give to you the blessing of Abraham, to you and to your offspring with you, so that you may take possession of the land where you have been living as a foreigner, which God has given to Abraham.”
5 So Isaac sent Jacob away, and he departed for Padʹdan-aʹram, to Laʹban the son of Be·thuʹel the A·ra·maeʹan, the brother of Re·bekʹah, the mother of Jacob and Eʹsau.
6 Eʹsau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob and had sent him away to Padʹdan-aʹram to take a wife from there and that when he blessed him, he commanded him, “Do not take a wife from the daughters of Caʹnaan,”
7 and that Jacob obeyed his father and his mother and departed for Padʹdan-aʹram.
8 Eʹsau then realized that the daughters of Caʹnaan were displeasing to his father Isaac,
9 so Eʹsau went to Ishʹma·el and took as wife Maʹha·lath the daughter of Abraham’s son Ishʹma·el, the sister of Ne·baʹioth, in addition to the other wives he already had.
10 Jacob departed from Beʹer-sheʹba and kept going toward Haʹran.
11 In time he came to a place and prepared to spend the night there because the sun had set. So he took one of the stones of that place and set it to rest his head on and lay down there.
12 Then he had a dream, and look! there was a stairway set on the earth, and its top reached up to the heavens; and there were God’s angels ascending and descending on it.
13 And look! there was Jehovah stationed above it, and he said: “I am Jehovah the God of Abraham your father and the God of Isaac. The land on which you are lying, to you I am going to give it and to your offspring.
14 And your offspring will certainly become like the dust particles of the earth, and you will spread abroad to the west and to the east and to the north and to the south, and by means of you and by means of your offspring all the families of the ground will certainly be blessed.
15 I am with you, and I will safeguard you wherever you go, and I will return you to this land. I will not leave you until I have done what I have promised you.”
16 Then Jacob awoke from his sleep and said: “Truly Jehovah is in this place, and I did not know it.”
17 And he grew fearful and added: “How awe-inspiring this place is! This can only be the house of God, and this is the gate of the heavens.”
18 So Jacob got up early in the morning and took the stone on which he had rested his head and set it up as a pillar and poured oil on top of it.
19 So he named that place Bethʹel, but previously the city’s name was Luz.
20 Jacob then made a vow, saying: “If God will continue with me and will protect me on my journey and will give me bread to eat and garments to wear
21 and I return in peace to the house of my father, then Jehovah will certainly have proved to be my God.
22 And this stone that I have set up as a pillar will become a house of God, and without fail I will give you a tenth of everything you give to me.”
29 After that Jacob resumed his journey and traveled on to the land of the people of the East.
2 Now he saw a well in the field and three droves of sheep lying down next to it, because they usually watered the droves from that well. There was a large stone over the mouth of the well.
3 When all the droves had been gathered there, they rolled away the stone from the mouth of the well, and they watered the flocks, after which they returned the stone to its place over the mouth of the well.
4 So Jacob said to them: “My brothers, what place are you from?” to which they said: “We are from Haʹran.”
5 He said to them: “Do you know Laʹban the grandson of Naʹhor?” to which they said: “We know him.”
6 At this he said to them: “Is he well?” They replied: “He is well. And here is his daughter Rachel coming with the sheep!”
7 Then he said: “It is still the middle of the day. It is not the time for gathering the herds. Water the sheep, and then go feed them.”
8 To this they said: “We are not allowed to do so until all the droves are gathered and they roll the stone away from the mouth of the well. Then we water the sheep.”
9 While he was yet speaking with them, Rachel came with her father’s sheep, for she was a shepherdess.
10 When Jacob saw Rachel, the daughter of Laʹban his mother’s brother, and the sheep of Laʹban, Jacob immediately approached and rolled the stone away from the mouth of the well and watered the sheep of Laʹban his mother’s brother.
11 Then Jacob kissed Rachel and raised his voice and burst into tears.
12 And Jacob began to tell Rachel that he was the relative of her father and that he was the son of Re·bekʹah. And she ran off and told her father.
13 As soon as Laʹban heard the report about Jacob the son of his sister, he ran to meet him. He embraced him and kissed him and brought him into his house. And he began to tell Laʹban all these things.
14 Laʹban said to him: “You are indeed my bone and my flesh.” So he stayed with him a full month.
15 Laʹban then said to Jacob: “Just because you are my relative, should you serve me for nothing? Tell me, what are your wages to be?”
16 Now Laʹban had two daughters. The name of the older was Leʹah, and the name of the younger, Rachel.
17 But the eyes of Leʹah had no luster, whereas Rachel had become a very attractive and beautiful woman.
18 Jacob had fallen in love with Rachel, so he said: “I am willing to serve you seven years for your younger daughter Rachel.”
19 To this Laʹban said: “It is better for me to give her to you than to give her to another man. Keep dwelling with me.”
20 And Jacob served seven years for Rachel, but in his eyes they were like just a few days because of his love for her.
21 Then Jacob said to Laʹban: “Give over my wife because my days are up, and let me have relations with her.”
22 With that Laʹban gathered all the men of the place and made a feast.
23 But during the evening, he resorted to taking his daughter Leʹah and bringing her to him that he might have relations with her.
24 Laʹban also gave his female servant Zilʹpah to his daughter Leʹah as a servant.
25 In the morning Jacob saw that it was Leʹah! So he said to Laʹban: “What have you done to me? Was it not for Rachel that I served you? Why have you tricked me?”
26 To this Laʹban said: “It is not our custom here to give the younger woman before the firstborn.
27 Celebrate the week of this woman. After that you will also be given this other woman in exchange for serving me seven more years.”
28 Jacob did so and celebrated the week of this woman, after which he gave him his daughter Rachel as a wife.
29 Besides, Laʹban gave his female servant Bilʹhah to his daughter Rachel as her servant.
30 Then Jacob had relations also with Rachel, and he loved Rachel more than Leʹah, and he served him for another seven years.
31 When Jehovah saw that Leʹah was unloved, he then enabled her to become pregnant, but Rachel was barren.
32 So Leʹah became pregnant and gave birth to a son and named him Reuʹben, for she said: “It is because Jehovah has looked upon my affliction, for now my husband will begin to love me.”
33 And she again became pregnant and gave birth to a son and then said: “It is because Jehovah has listened, in that I was unloved, so he gave me this one also.” Then she named him Simʹe·on.
34 And she became pregnant yet again and gave birth to a son and then said: “Now this time my husband will join himself to me, because I have borne him three sons.” Therefore, he was named Leʹvi.
35 And she became pregnant once more and gave birth to a son and then said: “This time I will praise Jehovah.” She therefore named him Judah. After that she stopped giving birth.
30 When Rachel saw that she had borne no children to Jacob, she became jealous of her sister and began to say to Jacob: “Give me children or else I will die.”
2 At this Jacob’s anger flared up against Rachel, and he said: “Am I in the place of God, who has prevented you from having children?”
3 So she said: “Here is my slave girl Bilʹhah. Have relations with her in order that she may bear children for me and that through her, I too may have children.”
4 With that she gave him her servant Bilʹhah as a wife, and Jacob had relations with her.
5 Bilʹhah became pregnant and in time bore Jacob a son.
6 Then Rachel said: “God has acted as my judge and has also listened to my voice, so that he gave me a son.” That is why she named him Dan.
7 Bilʹhah, Rachel’s servant, became pregnant once more and in time bore Jacob a second son.
8 Then Rachel said: “With strenuous wrestlings I have wrestled with my sister. I have also come off the winner!” So she named him Naphʹta·li.
9 When Leʹah saw that she had stopped having children, she took her servant Zilʹpah and gave her to Jacob as a wife.
10 And Leʹah’s servant Zilʹpah bore a son to Jacob.
11 Then Leʹah said: “With good fortune!” So she named him Gad.
12 After that Zilʹpah, Leʹah’s servant, bore a second son to Jacob.
13 Then Leʹah said: “With my happiness! For the daughters will certainly pronounce me happy.” So she named him Ashʹer.
14 Now Reuʹben was walking in the days of the wheat harvest, and he found mandrakes in the field. So he brought them to his mother Leʹah. Then Rachel said to Leʹah: “Give me, please, some of your son’s mandrakes.”
15 At this she said to her: “Is it a small matter that you took my husband? Would you now take my son’s mandrakes also?” So Rachel said: “Very well. He will lie down with you tonight in exchange for your son’s mandrakes.”
16 When Jacob was coming from the field in the evening, Leʹah went out to meet him and said: “It is with me you are going to have relations, because I have hired you outright with my son’s mandrakes.” So he lay down with her that night.
17 And God heard and answered Leʹah, and she became pregnant and in time bore to Jacob a fifth son.
18 Then Leʹah said: “God has given me my wages because I have given my servant to my husband.” So she named him Isʹsa·char.
19 And Leʹah became pregnant once more and in time bore a sixth son to Jacob.
20 Then Leʹah said: “God has endowed me, yes, me, with a good endowment. At last, my husband will tolerate me, for I have borne him six sons.” So she named him Zebʹu·lun.
21 Afterward she bore a daughter and named her Diʹnah.
22 Finally God remembered Rachel, and God heard and answered her by enabling her to become pregnant.
23 And she became pregnant and gave birth to a son. Then she said: “God has taken away my reproach!”
24 So she named him Joseph, saying: “Jehovah is adding another son to me.”
25 After Rachel had given birth to Joseph, Jacob immediately said to Laʹban: “Send me away so that I may go to my place and to my land.
26 Give over my wives and my children, for whom I have served with you, that I may go, for you well know how I have served you.”
27 Then Laʹban said to him: “If I have found favor in your eyes,—I have understood by the omens that Jehovah is blessing me because of you.”
28 And he added: “Stipulate your wages to me, and I will give them.”
29 So Jacob said to him: “You know how I have served you and how your herd has fared with me;
30 you had little before my coming, but your herd has increased and multiplied, and Jehovah has blessed you since I arrived. So when will I do something for my own house?”
31 Then he said: “What should I give you?” And Jacob said: “You will give me nothing whatsoever! If you will do this one thing for me, I will resume shepherding your flock and guarding it.
32 I will pass through your whole flock today. You set aside from there every sheep speckled and with color patches and every dark-brown sheep among the young rams and any color-patched and speckled one among the she-goats. From now on, these must become my wages.
33 And my righteousness must speak for me on a future day when you come to look over my wages; every one that is not speckled and color-patched among the she-goats and dark brown among the young rams will be considered stolen if it is with me.”
34 To this Laʹban said: “That is fine! Let it be according to your word.”
35 Then on that day, he set aside the he-goats striped and color-patched and all the she-goats speckled and color-patched, every one in which there was any white and every one dark brown among the young rams, and gave them into the care of his sons.
36 After that he set a distance of three days’ journey between himself and Jacob, and Jacob was shepherding the flocks of Laʹban that remained over.
37 Jacob then took freshly cut staffs of the storax, almond, and plane trees, and he peeled white spots in them by exposing the white wood of the staffs.
38 Then he placed the staffs that he had peeled in front of the flock, in the gutters, in the drinking troughs, where the flocks would come to drink, that they might get into heat in front of them when they came to drink.
39 So the flocks would get into heat in front of the staffs, and the flocks would produce striped, speckled, and color-patched offspring.
40 Then Jacob separated the young rams and turned the flocks to face the striped ones and all the dark-brown ones among the flocks of Laʹban. Then he separated his own flocks and did not mix them with Laʹban’s flocks.
41 And whenever the robust animals would get into heat, Jacob would place the staffs in the gutters before the eyes of the flocks, that they might get into heat by the staffs.
42 But when the animals were weak, he would not place the staffs there. So the weak ones always came to be Laʹban’s, but the robust ones became Jacob’s.
43 And the man grew very prosperous, and he acquired great flocks and male and female servants and camels and donkeys.
34 Now Diʹnah, Jacob’s daughter by Leʹah, used to go out to spend time with the young women of the land.
2 When Sheʹchem, the son of Haʹmor the Hiʹvite, a chieftain of the land, saw her, he took her and lay down with her and violated her.
3 And he became very attached to Diʹnah, the daughter of Jacob, and he fell in love with the young woman and spoke persuasively to her.
4 Finally Sheʹchem said to Haʹmor his father: “Get me this young woman to be my wife.”
5 When Jacob heard that he had defiled Diʹnah his daughter, his sons were with his herd in the field. So Jacob kept silent until they returned.
6 Later Haʹmor, Sheʹchem’s father, went out to speak with Jacob.
7 But the sons of Jacob heard about it and returned from the field right away. They were offended and very angry because he had disgraced Israel by lying down with Jacob’s daughter, something that should not be done.
8 Haʹmor spoke with them, saying: “My son Sheʹchem longs for your daughter. Please give her to him as his wife,
9 and form marriage alliances with us. Give us your daughters, and take our daughters for yourselves.
10 You may dwell with us, and the land will become available for you. Dwell and carry on trade in it and settle in it.”
11 Then Sheʹchem said to her father and to her brothers: “Let me find favor in your eyes, and I will give you whatever you ask me.
12 You can demand from me a very high bride price and gift. I am willing to give whatever you may say to me. Just give me the young woman as a wife.”
13 And Jacob’s sons answered Sheʹchem and Haʹmor his father deceitfully because he had defiled Diʹnah their sister.
14 They said to them: “We cannot possibly do such a thing, to give our sister to a man who is not circumcised, for that is a disgrace to us.
15 We can only consent on this condition: that you become like us and circumcise all your males.
16 Then we will give our daughters to you, and we will take your daughters for ourselves, and we will dwell with you and become one people.
17 But if you do not listen to us and get circumcised, then we will take our daughter and go.”
18 Their words pleased Haʹmor and Sheʹchem, Haʹmor’s son.
19 The young man did not delay in doing what they asked, because he found delight in Jacob’s daughter, and he was the most honorable of the whole house of his father.
20 So Haʹmor and his son Sheʹchem went to the city gate and spoke to the men of their city, saying:
21 “These men wish to be at peace with us. Let them dwell in the land and carry on trade in it, for the land is large enough to accommodate them. We can take their daughters as wives, and our daughters we can give to them.
22 Only on this one condition will the men consent to dwell with us in order to become one people: that every male among us be circumcised just the way they are circumcised.
23 Then, will not their possessions, their wealth, and all their livestock be ours? So let us give them our consent that they may dwell with us.”
24 All those going out by the gate of his city listened to Haʹmor and to his son Sheʹchem, and all the males got circumcised, all those going out of the city gate.
25 However, on the third day, when they were still in pain, two sons of Jacob, Simʹe·on and Leʹvi, Diʹnah’s brothers, each took his sword and went into the unsuspecting city and killed every male.
26 They killed Haʹmor and his son Sheʹchem with the sword and then took Diʹnah from Sheʹchem’s house and left.
27 Jacob’s other sons came upon the slain men and plundered the city because they had defiled their sister.
28 They took their flocks, their herds, their donkeys, and whatever was in the city and in the field.
29 They also took all their possessions, captured all their little children and their wives, and plundered everything in the houses.
30 At this Jacob said to Simʹe·on and to Leʹvi: “You have brought great trouble on me in making me a stench to the inhabitants of the land, to the Caʹnaan·ites and the Perʹiz·zites. I am few in number, and they will certainly gather together to attack me and I will be annihilated, I and my house.”
31 But they said: “Should anyone treat our sister like a prostitute?”
36 This is the history of Eʹsau, that is, Eʹdom.
2 Eʹsau took his wives from the daughters of Caʹnaan: Aʹdah the daughter of Eʹlon the Hitʹtite; and O·hol·i·baʹmah the daughter of Aʹnah, the granddaughter of Zibʹe·on the Hiʹvite;
3 and Basʹe·math, Ishʹma·el’s daughter, the sister of Ne·baʹioth.
4 And Aʹdah bore Elʹi·phaz to Eʹsau, and Basʹe·math bore Reuʹel,
5 and O·hol·i·baʹmah bore Jeʹush, Jaʹlam, and Korʹah. These are the sons of Eʹsau, who were born to him in the land of Caʹnaan.
6 After that Eʹsau took his wives, his sons, his daughters, all the members of his household, his herd and all his other beasts, and all the wealth he had accumulated in the land of Caʹnaan and he went to another land some distance away from Jacob his brother.
7 For their goods had become too many for them to dwell together, and the land where they were residing was not able to sustain them because of their herds.
8 So Eʹsau took up dwelling in the mountainous region of Seʹir. Eʹsau is Eʹdom.
9 And this is the history of Eʹsau the father of Eʹdom in the mountainous region of Seʹir.
10 These are the names of the sons of Eʹsau: Elʹi·phaz the son of Aʹdah, Eʹsau’s wife; Reuʹel the son of Basʹe·math, Eʹsau’s wife.
11 The sons of Elʹi·phaz were Teʹman, Oʹmar, Zeʹpho, Gaʹtam, and Keʹnaz.
12 Timʹna became the concubine of Elʹi·phaz, Eʹsau’s son. In time she bore to Elʹi·phaz, Amʹa·lek. These are the sons of Aʹdah, Eʹsau’s wife.
13 These are the sons of Reuʹel: Naʹhath, Zeʹrah, Shamʹmah, and Mizʹzah. These were the sons of Basʹe·math, Eʹsau’s wife.
14 These were the sons of O·hol·i·baʹmah the daughter of Aʹnah, the granddaughter of Zibʹe·on, Eʹsau’s wife, whom she bore to Eʹsau: Jeʹush, Jaʹlam, and Korʹah.
15 These are the sheikhs of the sons of Eʹsau: The sons of Elʹi·phaz, Eʹsau’s firstborn: Sheikh Teʹman, Sheikh Oʹmar, Sheikh Zeʹpho, Sheikh Keʹnaz,
16 Sheikh Korʹah, Sheikh Gaʹtam, and Sheikh Amʹa·lek. These are the sheikhs of Elʹi·phaz in the land of Eʹdom. These are the sons by Aʹdah.
17 These are the sons of Reuʹel, Eʹsau’s son: Sheikh Naʹhath, Sheikh Zeʹrah, Sheikh Shamʹmah, and Sheikh Mizʹzah. These are the sheikhs of Reuʹel in the land of Eʹdom. These are the sons by Basʹe·math, Eʹsau’s wife.
18 Finally these are the sons of O·hol·i·baʹmah, Eʹsau’s wife: Sheikh Jeʹush, Sheikh Jaʹlam, and Sheikh Korʹah. These are the sheikhs of O·hol·i·baʹmah the daughter of Aʹnah, Eʹsau’s wife.
19 These are the sons of Eʹsau, and these are their sheikhs. He is Eʹdom.
20 These are the sons of Seʹir the Horʹite, the inhabitants of the land: Loʹtan, Shoʹbal, Zibʹe·on, Aʹnah,
21 Diʹshon, Eʹzer, and Diʹshan. These are the sheikhs of the Horʹites, the sons of Seʹir, in the land of Eʹdom.
22 The sons of Loʹtan were Hoʹri and Heʹmam, and Loʹtan’s sister was Timʹna.
23 These are the sons of Shoʹbal: Alʹvan, Manʹa·hath, Eʹbal, Sheʹpho, and Oʹnam.
24 These are the sons of Zibʹe·on: Aʹiah and Aʹnah. This is the Aʹnah who found the hot springs in the wilderness while he was tending the donkeys for Zibʹe·on his father.
25 These are the children of Aʹnah: Diʹshon and O·hol·i·baʹmah the daughter of Aʹnah.
26 These are the sons of Diʹshon: Hemʹdan, Eshʹban, Ithʹran, and Cheʹran.
27 These are the sons of Eʹzer: Bilʹhan, Zaʹa·van, and Aʹkan.
28 These are the sons of Diʹshan: Uz and Aʹran.
29 These are the sheikhs of the Horʹites: Sheikh Loʹtan, Sheikh Shoʹbal, Sheikh Zibʹe·on, Sheikh Aʹnah,
30 Sheikh Diʹshon, Sheikh Eʹzer, and Sheikh Diʹshan. These are the sheikhs of the Horʹites according to their sheikhs in the land of Seʹir.
31 Now these are the kings who reigned in the land of Eʹdom before any king reigned over the Israelites.
32 Beʹla son of Beʹor reigned in Eʹdom, and the name of his city was Dinʹha·bah.
33 When Beʹla died, Joʹbab son of Zeʹrah from Bozʹrah began to reign in his place.
34 When Joʹbab died, Huʹsham from the land of the Teʹman·ites began to reign in his place.
35 When Huʹsham died, Haʹdad son of Beʹdad, who defeated the Midʹi·an·ites in the territory of Moʹab, began to reign in his place, and the name of his city was Aʹvith.
36 When Haʹdad died, Samʹlah from Mas·reʹkah began to reign in his place.
37 When Samʹlah died, Shaʹul from Re·hoʹboth by the River began to reign in his place.
38 When Shaʹul died, Baʹal-haʹnan the son of Achʹbor began to reign in his place.
39 When Baʹal-haʹnan the son of Achʹbor died, Haʹdar began to reign in his place. The name of his city was Paʹu, and the name of his wife was Me·hetʹa·bel the daughter of Maʹtred the daughter of Meʹza·hab.
40 So these are the names of the sheikhs of Eʹsau according to their families, according to their places, by their names: Sheikh Timʹna, Sheikh Alʹvah, Sheikh Jeʹtheth,
41 Sheikh O·hol·i·baʹmah, Sheikh Eʹlah, Sheikh Piʹnon,
42 Sheikh Keʹnaz, Sheikh Teʹman, Sheikh Mibʹzar,
43 Sheikh Magʹdi·el, and Sheikh Iʹram. These are the sheikhs of Eʹdom according to their settlements in the land of their possession. This is Eʹsau the father of Eʹdom.
38 About that time Judah left his brothers and pitched his tent near an A·dulʹlam·ite man named Hiʹrah.
2 There Judah saw the daughter of a certain Caʹnaan·ite named Shuʹa. So he took her and had relations with her,
3 and she became pregnant. Later she bore a son, and he named him Er.
4 Again she became pregnant and bore a son and named him Oʹnan.
5 Yet again she bore a son and named him Sheʹlah. He was in Achʹzib when she bore him.
6 In time Judah took a wife for Er his firstborn, and her name was Taʹmar.
7 But Er, Judah’s firstborn, was displeasing to Jehovah; so Jehovah put him to death.
8 In view of that, Judah said to Oʹnan: “Have relations with your brother’s wife and perform brother-in-law marriage with her and raise up offspring for your brother.”
9 But Oʹnan knew that the offspring would not be considered his. So when he did have relations with his brother’s wife, he wasted his semen on the ground so as not to give offspring to his brother.
10 What he did was bad in the eyes of Jehovah, so he also put him to death.
11 Judah said to Taʹmar his daughter-in-law: “Dwell as a widow in the house of your father until my son Sheʹlah grows up,” for he said to himself: ‘He too may die like his brothers.’ So Taʹmar went and stayed in her own father’s house.
12 Some time passed, and Judah’s wife, the daughter of Shuʹa, died. Judah kept the mourning period, and then he went to his sheepshearers in Timʹnah with his companion Hiʹrah the A·dulʹlam·ite.
13 Taʹmar was told: “Here your father-in-law is going up to Timʹnah to shear his sheep.”
14 With that she removed her widow’s clothing and veiled herself and covered herself with a shawl and sat down at the entrance of E·naʹim, which is on the road to Timʹnah, for she saw that Sheʹlah had grown up and yet she had not been given to him as a wife.
15 When Judah caught sight of her, he at once took her for a prostitute, because she had covered her face.
16 So he turned aside to her by the road and said: “Allow me, please, to have relations with you,” for he did not know that she was his daughter-in-law. However, she said: “What will you give me that you may have relations with me?”
17 To this he said: “I will send a young goat from my herd.” But she said: “Will you give a security until you send it?”
18 He continued: “What security should I give you?” to which she said: “Your seal ring and your cord and your rod that is in your hand.” Then he gave them to her and had relations with her, and she became pregnant by him.
19 After that she got up and went away and removed her shawl and clothed herself with her widow’s clothing.
20 And Judah sent the young goat by the hand of his companion the A·dulʹlam·ite, to get back the security from the hand of the woman, but he never found her.
21 He inquired of the men of her place, saying: “Where is that temple prostitute in E·naʹim along the road?” But they said: “No temple prostitute has ever been in this place.”
22 Finally he returned to Judah and said: “I never found her, and besides, the men of the place said, ‘No temple prostitute has ever been in this place.’”
23 So Judah said: “Let her take them for herself, in order that we may not fall into contempt. At any rate, I have sent this young goat, but you never found her.”
24 However, about three months later, Judah was told: “Taʹmar your daughter-in-law has acted as a prostitute, and she is also pregnant by her prostitution.” At that Judah said: “Bring her out and let her be burned.”
25 As she was being brought out, she sent word to her father-in-law: “I am pregnant by the man to whom these belong.” Then she added: “Please examine to whom these belong, the seal ring and the cord and the rod.”
26 Then Judah examined them and said: “She is more righteous than I am, because I did not give her to Sheʹlah my son.” And he had no further sexual relations with her after that.
27 When the time came for her to give birth, there were twins in her womb.
28 As she was giving birth, one put out his hand, and the midwife immediately took a scarlet thread and tied it around his hand, saying: “This one came out first.”
29 But as soon as he drew back his hand, his brother came out, and she exclaimed: “What a breach you have made for yourself!” So he was named Peʹrez.
30 Afterward his brother came out, around whose hand the scarlet thread was tied, and he was named Zeʹrah.
39 Now Joseph was taken down to Egypt, and an Egyptian named Potʹi·phar, a court official of Pharʹaoh and chief of the guard, bought him from the Ishʹma·el·ites who had taken him down there.
2 But Jehovah was with Joseph. As a result, he became successful and was put over the house of his master, the Egyptian.
3 And his master saw that Jehovah was with him and that Jehovah was making everything that he did successful.
4 Joseph kept finding favor in his eyes, and he became his personal attendant. So he appointed him over his house, and he put him in charge of all that was his.
5 From the time he appointed him over his house and in charge of all that was his, Jehovah kept blessing the house of the Egyptian because of Joseph, and Jehovah’s blessing came to be on all that he had in the house and in the field.
6 He eventually left everything that was his in Joseph’s care, and he gave no thought to anything except the food he was eating. Moreover, Joseph grew to be well-built and handsome.
7 Now after these things, the wife of his master began to cast her eyes on Joseph and say: “Lie down with me.”
8 But he refused and said to his master’s wife: “Here my master does not know what is with me in the house, and he has entrusted everything he has into my care.
9 There is no one greater in this house than I am, and he has not withheld from me anything at all except you, because you are his wife. So how could I commit this great badness and actually sin against God?”
10 So day after day she spoke to Joseph, but he never consented to lie with her or to remain with her.
11 But on one of the days when he went into the house to do his work, none of the household servants were in the house.
12 Then she grabbed hold of him by his garment and said: “Lie down with me!” But he left his garment in her hand and fled outside.
13 As soon as she saw that he had left his garment in her hand and had fled outside,
14 she began to cry out to the men of her house and to say to them: “Look! He brought to us this Hebrew man to make us a laughingstock. He came to me to lie down with me, but I began to cry out at the top of my voice.
15 Then as soon as he heard me raising my voice and screaming, he left his garment beside me and fled outside.”
16 After that she laid his garment beside her until his master came to his house.
17 Then she told him the same thing, saying: “The Hebrew servant whom you brought to us came to me to make me a laughingstock.
18 But as soon as I raised my voice and began to scream, he left his garment beside me and fled outside.”
19 As soon as his master heard the words his wife spoke to him, saying: “These are the things your servant did to me,” his anger blazed.
20 So Joseph’s master took him and gave him over to the prison, the place where the prisoners of the king were kept under arrest, and he remained there in the prison.
21 But Jehovah continued with Joseph and kept showing loyal love to him and granting him favor in the eyes of the chief officer of the prison.
22 So the chief officer of the prison put Joseph in charge of all the prisoners in the prison, and everything that they were doing there, he was the one having it done.
23 The chief officer of the prison was looking after absolutely nothing that was in Joseph’s care, for Jehovah was with Joseph and Jehovah made whatever he did successful.
40 After these things, the chief cupbearer of the king of Egypt and the chief baker sinned against their lord, the king of Egypt.
2 So Pharʹaoh grew indignant at his two officers, the chief cupbearer and the chief baker,
3 and he committed them to the jail of the house of the chief of the guard, to the place where Joseph was a prisoner.
4 Then the chief of the guard assigned Joseph to be with them and to take care of them, and they remained in jail for some time.
5 The cupbearer and the baker of the king of Egypt, who were confined in the prison, each had a dream on the same night, and each dream had its own interpretation.
6 The next morning, when Joseph came in and saw them, they looked dejected.
7 So he asked the officers of Pharʹaoh who were in custody with him in his master’s house: “Why are your faces gloomy today?”
8 At this they said to him: “We each had a dream, but there is no interpreter with us.” Joseph said to them: “Do not interpretations belong to God? Relate it to me, please.”
9 So the chief cupbearer related his dream to Joseph, saying to him: “In my dream, there was a vine before me.
10 And on the vine, there were three twigs, and as it was sprouting shoots, it blossomed, and its clusters ripened into grapes.
11 And Pharʹaoh’s cup was in my hand, and I took the grapes and squeezed them out into Pharʹaoh’s cup. After that I put the cup in Pharʹaoh’s hand.”
12 Then Joseph said to him: “This is its interpretation: The three twigs are three days.
13 Three days from now, Pharʹaoh will bring you out, restoring you to your office, and you will put Pharʹaoh’s cup into his hand as you did before when you were his cupbearer.
14 Nevertheless, you must remember me when things go well with you. Please show me loyal love and mention me to Pharʹaoh, in order to get me out of this place.
15 I was, in fact, kidnapped from the land of the Hebrews, and I have not done anything here for which they should put me in prison.”
16 When the chief baker saw that Joseph had interpreted something good, he said to him: “I too was in my dream, and there were three baskets of white bread on my head,
17 and in the top basket, there were all sorts of baked goods for Pharʹaoh, and there were birds eating them out of the basket on top of my head.”
18 Then Joseph answered, “This is its interpretation: The three baskets are three days.
19 Three days from now, Pharʹaoh will behead you and will hang you on a stake, and the birds will eat your flesh from you.”
20 Now the third day was Pharʹaoh’s birthday, and he made a feast for all his servants, and he brought out both the chief cupbearer and the chief baker in the presence of his servants.
21 And he returned the chief cupbearer to his post of cupbearer, and he continued to hand the cup to Pharʹaoh.
22 But he hanged the chief baker, just as Joseph had interpreted to them.
23 However, the chief cupbearer did not remember Joseph; he kept forgetting him.
43 Now the famine was severe in the land.
2 So when they had finished eating the grain they had brought from Egypt, their father said to them: “Return and buy a little food for us.”
3 Then Judah said to him: “The man clearly warned us, ‘You must not see my face again unless your brother is with you.’
4 If you send our brother with us, we will go down and buy food for you.
5 But if you do not send him, we will not go down, for the man said to us, ‘You must not see my face again unless your brother is with you.’”
6 And Israel asked: “Why did you have to bring this trouble on me by telling the man that you had another brother?”
7 They replied: “The man directly inquired concerning us and our relatives, saying, ‘Is your father still alive? Do you have another brother?’ and we told him these facts. How could we possibly know that he would say, ‘Bring your brother down’?”
8 Judah then urged Israel his father: “Send the boy with me, and let us go on our way so that we may live and not die—we and you and our children.
9 I will be a guarantee for his safety. You may hold me responsible. If I fail to return him to you and present him to you, I will have sinned against you for all time.
10 But if we had not delayed, we could have been there and back twice by now.”
11 So Israel their father said to them: “If it must be so, then do this: Take the finest products of the land in your bags and carry them down to the man as a gift: a little balsam, a little honey, labdanum, resinous bark, pistachio nuts, and almonds.
12 Take double the money with you; and also take back the money that was returned in the mouth of your bags. Maybe it was a mistake.
13 Take your brother and go, return to the man.
14 May God Almighty grant you pity from the man, so that he may release to you your other brother and Benjamin. But as for me, if I must be bereaved, I will be bereaved!”
15 So the men took this gift, and they took double the money in their hand and Benjamin. Then they rose and went on their way down to Egypt and again stood before Joseph.
16 When Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he at once said to the man who was over his house: “Take the men to the house and slaughter animals and prepare the meal, for the men are to eat with me at noon.”
17 Immediately the man did just as Joseph had said, and he took them to Joseph’s house.
18 But the men became afraid when they were taken to Joseph’s house, and they began to say: “It is because of the money that was returned in our bags the last time that we are being brought here. Now they will attack us and make us slaves and take our donkeys!”
19 So they approached the man who was over Joseph’s house and spoke to him at the entrance of the house.
20 They said: “Pardon us, my lord! We did come down the first time to buy food.
21 But when we arrived at our lodging place and began opening our bags, why, here was the money of each one in the mouth of his bag, our money in full weight. So we would like to return it personally.
22 And we have brought more money to buy food. We do not know who placed our money in our bags.”
23 Then he said: “It is all right. Do not be afraid. Your God and the God of your father put treasure in your bags. Your money came first to me.” After that he brought out Simʹe·on to them.
24 Then the man brought them into Joseph’s house and gave them water for washing their feet, and he gave fodder for their donkeys.
25 And they prepared the gift for Joseph’s coming at noon, for they had heard that they were going to eat a meal there.
26 When Joseph went into the house, they brought their gift to him into the house and prostrated themselves to him to the ground.
27 After this he inquired about their welfare and said: “How is your aged father of whom you have spoken? Is he still alive?”
28 To this they said: “Your servant our father is well. He is still alive.” Then they bowed down and prostrated themselves.
29 When he looked up and saw Benjamin his brother, the son of his mother, he said: “Is this your brother, the youngest one of whom you have spoken to me?” He added: “May God show you his favor, my son.”
30 Joseph then hurried out, because he was overcome with emotion for his brother, and he looked for a place to weep. So he went into a private room and gave way to tears there.
31 After that he washed his face and went out, now in control of himself, and he said: “Serve the meal.”
32 They served him by himself and them by themselves, and the Egyptians with him ate by themselves, for the Egyptians could not eat a meal with the Hebrews, because that is a detestable thing to the Egyptians.
33 The brothers were seated before him, the firstborn according to his right as firstborn and the youngest according to his youth, and they kept looking at one another in amazement.
34 He kept sending portions of food from his table to theirs, but he increased Benjamin’s portion five times the size of the portions of all the others. So they continued banqueting and drinking with him to the full.
44 Later he commanded the man who was over his house: “Fill the bags of the men with as much food as they can carry, and place the money of each one in the mouth of his bag.
2 But you must place my cup, the silver cup, in the mouth of the bag of the youngest, along with the money for his grain.” So he did as Joseph had instructed.
3 In the morning when it had become light, the men were sent away with their donkeys.
4 They had not gone far from the city when Joseph said to the man who was over his house: “Get up! Chase after the men! When you overtake them, say to them, ‘Why have you repaid bad for good?
5 Is not this what my master drinks from and uses to read omens expertly? It is a wicked thing you have done.’”
6 So he overtook them and spoke these words to them.
7 But they said to him: “Why does my lord say such a thing? It is unthinkable that your servants would do anything like this.
8 Why, the money that we found in the mouth of our bags we brought back to you from the land of Caʹnaan. How, then, could we steal silver or gold from the house of your master?
9 If it is found with one of your slaves, let him die, and the rest of us will also become slaves to my master.”
10 So he said: “Let it be as you say: The one with whom it is found will become my slave, but the rest of you will be innocent.”
11 With that each one quickly lowered his bag to the ground and opened it.
12 He searched carefully, starting with the oldest and finishing with the youngest. Finally the cup was found in Benjamin’s bag.
13 Then they ripped their garments apart, and each of them lifted his load back onto his donkey and returned to the city.
14 When Judah and his brothers went into Joseph’s house, he was still there; and they fell to the ground before him.
15 Joseph said to them: “What is this deed that you have done? Did you not know that a man like me can expertly read omens?”
16 At this Judah replied: “What can we say to my master? What can we speak? And how can we prove ourselves righteous? The true God has found out the error of your slaves. We are now slaves to my master, both we and the one in whose hand the cup was found!”
17 However, he said: “It is unthinkable for me to do this! The man in whose hand the cup was found is the one who will become a slave to me. As for the rest of you, go up in peace to your father.”
18 Judah now approached him and said: “I beg you, my master, please let your slave speak a word in my master’s ears, and do not become angry with your slave, for you are like Pharʹaoh himself.
19 My master asked his slaves, ‘Do you have a father or a brother?’
20 So we said to my master, ‘We do have an aged father and a child of his old age, the youngest. But his brother is dead, so he is the only remaining son of his mother, and his father loves him.’
21 After that you said to your slaves, ‘Bring him down to me so that I may see him.’
22 But we said to my master, ‘The boy is not able to leave his father. If he did leave him, his father would certainly die.’
23 Then you said to your slaves, ‘Unless your youngest brother comes down with you, you may not see my face anymore.’
24 “So we went up to your slave my father and told him the words of my master.
25 Later our father said, ‘Return and buy a little food for us.’
26 But we said, ‘We are not able to go down. If our youngest brother is with us we will go down, for we cannot see the man’s face unless our youngest brother is with us.’
27 Then your slave my father said to us, ‘You well know that my wife bore but two sons to me.
28 But one of them left me and I said: “He must surely have been torn to pieces!” and I have not seen him until now.
29 If you were to take this one also out of my sight and a fatal accident were to befall him, you would certainly bring down my gray hairs to the Grave with calamity.’
30 “And now if I return to your slave my father without the boy along with us, since his own life is bound up with this one’s life,
31 then as soon as he sees that the boy is not there, he will die, and your slaves will indeed bring down the gray hairs of your slave our father to the Grave in grief.
32 Your slave gave a guarantee to my father for the boy, saying, ‘If I fail to bring him back to you, then I will have sinned against my father forever.’
33 So now, please, let your slave stay instead of the boy as my master’s slave, in order that the boy may return with his brothers.
34 How can I return to my father without the boy along with me? I could not bear looking on when this calamity befalls my father!”
48 After these things, Joseph was told: “Look, your father is getting weak.” At that he took his two sons Ma·nasʹseh and Eʹphra·im with him.
2 Then Jacob was told: “Here your son Joseph has come to you.” So Israel gathered his strength and sat up on his bed.
3 And Jacob said to Joseph: “God Almighty appeared to me at Luz in the land of Caʹnaan and blessed me.
4 And he said to me, ‘I am making you fruitful, and I will make you many, and I will transform you into a congregation of peoples, and I will give this land to your offspring after you as a lasting possession.’
5 Now your two sons who were born to you in the land of Egypt before I came to you in Egypt are mine. Eʹphra·im and Ma·nasʹseh will become mine just as Reuʹben and Simʹe·on are mine.
6 But the children born to you after them will become yours. They will be called by the name of their brothers in their inheritance.
7 As for me, when I was coming from Padʹdan, Rachel died alongside me in the land of Caʹnaan, while there was yet a good stretch of land before coming to Ephʹrath. So I buried her there on the way to Ephʹrath, that is, Bethʹle·hem.”
8 Then Israel saw Joseph’s sons and asked: “Who are these?”
9 So Joseph said to his father: “They are my sons whom God has given me in this place.” At this he said: “Bring them to me, please, so that I may bless them.”
10 Now the eyes of Israel were failing from age, and he was unable to see. So Joseph brought them close to him, and he kissed them and embraced them.
11 Israel said to Joseph: “I never imagined I would see your face, but here God has also let me see your offspring.”
12 Joseph then removed them from Israel’s knees, and he bowed down with his face to the ground.
13 Joseph now took the two of them, Eʹphra·im with his right hand to Israel’s left and Ma·nasʹseh with his left hand to Israel’s right, and brought them close to him.
14 However, Israel put out his right hand and placed it on Eʹphra·im’s head, although he was the younger, and he placed his left hand on Ma·nasʹseh’s head. He purposely laid his hands this way, since Ma·nasʹseh was the firstborn.
15 Then he blessed Joseph and said: “The true God before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac walked, The true God who has been shepherding me during all my life until this day,
16 The angel who has been recovering me from all calamity, bless the boys. Let my name be called upon them and the name of my fathers, Abraham and Isaac, Let them increase to a multitude in the earth.”
17 When Joseph saw that his father kept his right hand placed on Eʹphra·im’s head, it was displeasing to him, so he tried to take hold of his father’s hand to move it from Eʹphra·im’s head to Ma·nasʹseh’s head.
18 Joseph said to his father: “Not so, my father, because this is the firstborn. Put your right hand on his head.”
19 But his father kept refusing and said: “I know it, my son, I know it. He too will become a people, and he too will become great. Nevertheless, his younger brother will become greater than he will, and his offspring will become the full equivalent of nations.”
20 So he continued to bless them on that day, saying: “Let Israel mention you when they pronounce blessings, saying, ‘May God make you like Eʹphra·im and like Ma·nasʹseh.’” Thus he kept putting Eʹphra·im before Ma·nasʹseh.
21 Then Israel said to Joseph: “Look, I am dying, but God will certainly continue with you and return you to the land of your forefathers.
22 As for me, I do give you one portion of land more than to your brothers, which I took from the hand of the Amʹor·ites with my sword and my bow.”
2 About that time, a certain man of the house of Leʹvi married a daughter of Leʹvi.
2 And the woman became pregnant and gave birth to a son. When she saw how beautiful he was, she kept him concealed for three months.
3 When she was no longer able to conceal him, she took a papyrus basket and coated it with bitumen and pitch and put the child in it and placed it among the reeds by the bank of the Nile River.
4 But his sister stood at a distance to see what would happen to him.
5 When Pharʹaoh’s daughter came down to bathe in the Nile, her female attendants were walking by the side of the Nile. And she caught sight of the basket in the middle of the reeds. She immediately sent her slave girl to get it.
6 When she opened it, she saw the child, and the boy was crying. She felt compassion for him, but she said: “This is one of the children of the Hebrews.”
7 Then his sister said to Pharʹaoh’s daughter: “Shall I go and call a nursing woman from the Hebrews to nurse the child for you?”
8 Pharʹaoh’s daughter said to her: “Go!” At once the girl went and called the child’s mother.
9 Pharʹaoh’s daughter then said to her: “Take this child with you and nurse him for me, and I will pay you.” So the woman took the child and nursed him.
10 When the child grew older, she brought him to Pharʹaoh’s daughter, and he became a son to her. She named him Moses and said: “It is because I have drawn him out of the water.”
11 Now in those days, after Moses had become an adult, he went out to his brothers to look at the burdens they were bearing, and he caught sight of an Egyptian beating a Hebrew, one of his brothers.
12 So he looked this way and that, and seeing no one, he killed the Egyptian and hid him in the sand.
13 But he went out on the following day, and there were two Hebrew men fighting with each other. So he said to the one in the wrong: “Why do you strike your companion?”
14 At this he said: “Who appointed you as a prince and a judge over us? Are you planning to kill me just as you killed the Egyptian?” Moses now was afraid and said: “Surely the matter has become known!”
15 Then Pharʹaoh heard about it, and he attempted to kill Moses; but Moses ran away from Pharʹaoh and went to dwell in the land of Midʹi·an, and he sat down by a well.
16 Now the priest of Midʹi·an had seven daughters, and these came to draw water and to fill the troughs to water their father’s flock.
17 But as usual, the shepherds came and drove them away. At this Moses got up and helped the women and watered their flock.
18 When they came home to their father Reuʹel, he exclaimed: “How is it that you have come home so quickly today?”
19 They replied: “A certain Egyptian rescued us from the shepherds, and he even drew water for us and watered the flock.”
20 He said to his daughters: “But where is he? Why did you leave the man behind? Call him, so that he may eat with us.”
21 After that Moses consented to stay with the man, and he gave his daughter Zip·poʹrah to Moses in marriage.
22 Later she bore a son, and he named him Gerʹshom, for he said, “I have become a foreign resident in a foreign land.”
23 After a long time, the king of Egypt died, but the Israelites continued to groan because of the slavery and to cry out in complaint, and their cry for help because of the slavery kept going up to the true God.
24 In time God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
25 So God looked on the Israelites; and God took notice.
3 Moses became a shepherd of the flock of his father-in-law Jethʹro, the priest of Midʹi·an. While he was leading the flock to the west side of the wilderness, he eventually came to the mountain of the true God, to Hoʹreb.
2 Then Jehovah’s angel appeared to him in a flame of fire in the midst of a thornbush. As he kept looking, he saw that the thornbush was on fire, and yet the thornbush was not consumed.
3 So Moses said: “I will go over to inspect this unusual sight to see why the thornbush does not burn up.”
4 When Jehovah saw that he went over to look, God called to him out of the thornbush and said: “Moses! Moses!” to which he said: “Here I am.”
5 Then he said: “Do not come any nearer. Remove your sandals from your feet, because the place where you are standing is holy ground.”
6 He went on to say: “I am the God of your father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.” Then Moses hid his face, because he was afraid to look at the true God.
7 Jehovah added: “I have certainly seen the affliction of my people who are in Egypt, and I have heard their outcry because of those who force them to work; I well know the pains they suffer.
8 I will go down to rescue them out of the hand of the Egyptians and to bring them up out of that land to a land good and spacious, a land flowing with milk and honey, the territory of the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Amʹor·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites.
9 Now look! The outcry of the people of Israel has reached me, and I have seen also the harsh way that the Egyptians are oppressing them.
10 Now come, I will send you to Pharʹaoh, and you will bring my people the Israelites out of Egypt.”
11 However, Moses said to the true God: “Who am I that I should go to Pharʹaoh and bring the Israelites out of Egypt?”
12 To this he said: “I will prove to be with you, and this is the sign for you that it was I who sent you: After you have brought the people out of Egypt, you people will serve the true God on this mountain.”
13 But Moses said to the true God: “Suppose I go to the Israelites and say to them, ‘The God of your forefathers has sent me to you,’ and they say to me, ‘What is his name?’ What should I say to them?”
14 So God said to Moses: “I Will Become What I Choose to Become.” And he added: “This is what you are to say to the Israelites, ‘I Will Become has sent me to you.’”
15 Then God said once more to Moses: “This is what you are to say to the Israelites, ‘Jehovah the God of your forefathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has sent me to you.’ This is my name forever, and this is how I am to be remembered from generation to generation.
16 Now go, and gather the elders of Israel and say to them, ‘Jehovah the God of your forefathers has appeared to me, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and he said: “I have certainly taken notice of you and of what is being done to you in Egypt.
17 So I say, I will take you away from affliction at the hands of the Egyptians to the land of the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Amʹor·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites, to a land flowing with milk and honey.”’
18 “They will certainly listen to your voice, and you will go, you and the elders of Israel, to the king of Egypt, and you men should say to him: ‘Jehovah the God of the Hebrews has communicated with us. So, please, let us make a three-day journey into the wilderness so that we may sacrifice to Jehovah our God.’
19 But I myself well know that the king of Egypt will not give you permission to go unless a mighty hand compels him.
20 So I will have to stretch out my hand and strike Egypt with all my extraordinary acts that I will do in it, and after that he will send you out.
21 And I will give this people favor in the eyes of the Egyptians, and when you go, you will by no means go empty-handed.
22 Each woman must ask her neighbor and the woman lodging in her house for articles of silver and of gold as well as clothing, and you will put them on your sons and your daughters; and you will plunder the Egyptians.”
4 However, Moses answered: “But suppose they do not believe me and do not listen to my voice, for they will say, ‘Jehovah did not appear to you.’”
2 Then Jehovah said to him: “What is that in your hand?” He answered: “A rod.”
3 He said: “Throw it on the ground.” So he threw it on the ground, and it became a serpent; and Moses fled from it.
4 Jehovah now said to Moses: “Reach out your hand and seize it by the tail.” So he reached out and seized it, and it became a rod in his hand.
5 God then said: “This is so that they may believe that Jehovah the God of their forefathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has appeared to you.”
6 Jehovah said to him once more: “Put your hand, please, into the upper fold of your garment.” So he put his hand into the fold of his garment. When he drew it out, why, his hand was stricken with leprosy like snow!
7 Then he said: “Return your hand into the upper fold of your garment.” So he returned his hand into his garment. When he drew it out of the garment, it was restored like the rest of his flesh!
8 He said: “If they will not believe you or pay attention to the first sign, then they will certainly heed the next sign.
9 Still, even if they will not believe these two signs and refuse to listen to your voice, you will take some water from the Nile River and pour it out on the dry land, and the water that you take from the Nile will become blood on the dry land.”
10 Moses now said to Jehovah: “Pardon me, Jehovah, but I have never been a fluent speaker, neither in the past nor since you have spoken to your servant, for I am slow of speech and slow of tongue.”
11 Jehovah said to him: “Who made a mouth for man, or who makes them speechless, deaf, clear-sighted, or blind? Is it not I, Jehovah?
12 So go now, and I will be with you as you speak, and I will teach you what you should say.”
13 But he said: “Pardon me, Jehovah, please send anyone whom you want to send.”
14 Then Jehovah’s anger blazed against Moses, and he said: “What about your brother Aaron the Levite? I know that he can speak very well. And he is now on his way here to meet you. When he sees you, his heart will rejoice.
15 So you must speak to him and put the words in his mouth, and I will be with you and him as you speak, and I will teach you men what to do.
16 He will speak for you to the people, and he will be your spokesman, and you will serve as God to him.
17 And you will take this rod in your hand and perform the signs with it.”
18 So Moses went back to Jethʹro his father-in-law and said to him: “I want to go, please, and return to my brothers who are in Egypt to see whether they are still alive.” Jethʹro said to Moses: “Go in peace.”
19 After that Jehovah said to Moses in Midʹi·an: “Go, return to Egypt, because all the men who were seeking to kill you are dead.”
20 Then Moses took his wife and his sons and lifted them onto a donkey, and he started back to the land of Egypt. Moreover, Moses took the rod of the true God in his hand.
21 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “After you have returned to Egypt, see that you perform before Pharʹaoh all the miracles that I have empowered you to do. But I will allow his heart to become obstinate, and he will not send the people away.
22 You must say to Pharʹaoh, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Israel is my son, my firstborn.
23 I say to you, Send my son away so that he may serve me. But if you refuse to send him away, I am going to kill your son, your firstborn.”’”
24 Now on the road at the lodging place, Jehovah met him and was seeking to put him to death.
25 Finally Zip·poʹrah took a flint and circumcised her son and caused his foreskin to touch his feet and said: “It is because you are a bridegroom of blood to me.”
26 So He let him go. At that time she said, “a bridegroom of blood,” because of the circumcision.
27 Then Jehovah said to Aaron: “Go into the wilderness to meet Moses.” So he went and met him at the mountain of the true God and greeted him with a kiss.
28 And Moses told Aaron all the words of Jehovah, who had sent him, and all the signs that He had commanded him to do.
29 After that Moses and Aaron went and gathered all the elders of the Israelites.
30 Aaron told them all the words that Jehovah had spoken to Moses, and he performed the signs before the eyes of the people.
31 At this the people believed. When they heard that Jehovah had turned his attention to the Israelites and that he had seen their affliction, they bowed down and prostrated themselves.
5 Afterward, Moses and Aaron went in and said to Pharʹaoh: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘Send my people away so that they may celebrate a festival to me in the wilderness.’”
2 But Pharʹaoh said: “Who is Jehovah, that I should obey his voice to send Israel away? I do not know Jehovah at all, and what is more, I will not send Israel away.”
3 But they said: “The God of the Hebrews has communicated with us. Please, we want to make a three-day journey into the wilderness and sacrifice to Jehovah our God; otherwise, he will strike us with disease or with the sword.”
4 The king of Egypt replied to them: “Why is it, Moses and Aaron, that you are taking the people away from their work? Return to your labor!”
5 And Pharʹaoh continued: “Look at how many people of the land there are, and you would have them rest from their labor.”
6 That same day, Pharʹaoh commanded the taskmasters and their foremen:
7 “You must no longer give straw to the people to make bricks. Let them go and gather straw for themselves.
8 But you must still impose on them the same quota of bricks as they made in the past. Do not reduce it for them, for they are relaxing. That is why they are crying out, ‘We want to go, we want to sacrifice to our God!’
9 Make them work harder, and keep them busy so that they will not pay attention to lies.”
10 So the taskmasters and their foremen went out and said to the people: “Here is what Pharʹaoh has said, ‘I am giving you no more straw.
11 Go and get your own straw for yourselves wherever you can find it, but your work will not be reduced at all.’”
12 Then the people scattered throughout all the land of Egypt to gather stubble for straw.
13 And the taskmasters kept urging them: “You must each finish your work every day, just as when straw was provided.”
14 Also the foremen of the Israelites, whom Pharʹaoh’s taskmasters had appointed over them, were beaten. They asked them: “Why did you not reach the quota of bricks that you used to make? It happened both yesterday and today.”
15 So the foremen of the Israelites went in and complained to Pharʹaoh: “Why are you treating your servants this way?
16 No straw is given to your servants, yet they are saying to us, ‘Make bricks!’ Your servants are beaten, but your own people are at fault.”
17 But he said: “You are relaxing, you are relaxing! That is why you are saying, ‘We want to go, we want to sacrifice to Jehovah.’
18 So now go, get back to work! No straw will be given to you, but you must still produce your quota of bricks.”
19 Then the foremen of the Israelites saw that they were in serious trouble because of the order: “You must not reduce your daily quota of bricks at all.”
20 After that they met up with Moses and Aaron, who were standing there to meet them as they came out from Pharʹaoh.
21 At once they said to them: “May Jehovah look upon you and judge, since you have made Pharʹaoh and his servants despise us and you have put a sword in their hand to kill us.”
22 Then Moses turned to Jehovah and said: “Jehovah, why have you afflicted this people? Why have you sent me?
23 From the time that I went in before Pharʹaoh to speak in your name, he has dealt worse with this people, and you have certainly not rescued your people.”
8 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Go in to Pharʹaoh and say to him, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Send my people away so that they may serve me.
2 If you keep refusing to send them away, I will plague all your territory with frogs.
3 And the Nile River will swarm with frogs, and they will come up and enter into your house, into your bedroom, on your bed, into the houses of your servants and on your people, into your ovens, and into your kneading troughs.
4 On you, on your people, and on all your servants, the frogs will come up.”’”
5 Jehovah later said to Moses: “Say to Aaron, ‘Stretch out your hand with your rod over the rivers, the Nile canals, and the marshes, and make the frogs come up over the land of Egypt.’”
6 So Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt, and the frogs began to come up and to cover the land of Egypt.
7 However, the magic-practicing priests did the same thing by their secret arts, and they too made the frogs come up over the land of Egypt.
8 Pharʹaoh then called Moses and Aaron and said: “Plead with Jehovah to remove the frogs from me and my people, as I want to send the people away so that they may sacrifice to Jehovah.”
9 Then Moses said to Pharʹaoh: “I leave to you the honor of telling me when I should plead to have the frogs removed from you, your servants, your people, and your houses. Only in the Nile River will they be left.”
10 To this he said: “Tomorrow.” So he said: “It will be according to your word so that you may know that there is no one else like Jehovah our God.
11 The frogs will depart from you, your houses, your servants, and your people. They will be left only in the Nile.”
12 So Moses and Aaron went out from Pharʹaoh, and Moses pleaded with Jehovah about the frogs that He had brought upon Pharʹaoh.
13 Then Jehovah did as Moses asked, and the frogs began to die in the houses, the courtyards, and the fields.
14 They were piling them up in countless heaps, and the land began to stink.
15 When Pharʹaoh saw that there was relief, he hardened his heart and he refused to listen to them, just as Jehovah had said.
16 Jehovah now said to Moses: “Say to Aaron, ‘Stretch out your rod and strike the dust of the earth, and it must become gnats in all the land of Egypt.’”
17 And they did this. Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod and struck the dust of the earth, and the gnats came on man and beast. All the dust of the earth became gnats in all the land of Egypt.
18 The magic-practicing priests tried to do the same and produce gnats by their secret arts, but they could not. And the gnats came on man and beast.
19 So the magic-practicing priests said to Pharʹaoh: “It is the finger of God!” But Pharʹaoh’s heart continued to be obstinate, and he did not listen to them, just as Jehovah had said.
20 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Get up early in the morning and station yourself in front of Pharʹaoh. Look! He is coming out to the water! And you must say to him, ‘This is what Jehovah has said: “Send my people away so that they may serve me.
21 But if you do not send my people away, I will send on you, your servants, and your people and into your houses the gadfly; and the houses of Egypt will be full of gadflies, and they will even cover the ground they stand on.
22 On that day I will certainly set apart the land of Goʹshen, where my people are dwelling. No gadflies will exist there, and by this you will know that I, Jehovah, am here in the land.
23 And I will make a distinction between my people and your people. Tomorrow this sign will take place.”’”
24 And Jehovah did so, and heavy swarms of gadflies began to invade the house of Pharʹaoh and the houses of his servants and all the land of Egypt. The land was ruined by the gadflies.
25 Finally, Pharʹaoh called Moses and Aaron and said: “Go, sacrifice to your God in the land.”
26 But Moses said: “It is not proper to do so, because what we would sacrifice to Jehovah our God would be detestable to the Egyptians. If we would make a sacrifice that was detestable to the Egyptians right before their eyes, would they not stone us?
27 We will make a three-day journey into the wilderness, and there we will sacrifice to Jehovah our God, just as he has said to us.”
28 Pharʹaoh now said: “I will send you away to sacrifice to Jehovah your God in the wilderness. Only, you must not go so far away. Plead in my behalf.”
29 Then Moses said: “Now I am going away from you, and I will plead with Jehovah, and the gadflies will depart from Pharʹaoh, his servants, and his people tomorrow. But Pharʹaoh must stop trifling with us by refusing to send the people away to sacrifice to Jehovah.”
30 Moses then went out from Pharʹaoh and pleaded with Jehovah.
31 So Jehovah did according to Moses’ word, and the gadflies departed from Pharʹaoh, his servants, and his people. Not one was left.
32 However, Pharʹaoh again hardened his heart and did not send the people away.
9 So Jehovah said to Moses: “Go in to Pharʹaoh and say to him, ‘This is what Jehovah the God of the Hebrews has said: “Send my people away so that they may serve me.
2 But if you refuse to send them away and you keep holding them,
3 look! Jehovah’s hand will come against your livestock in the field. On the horses, the donkeys, the camels, the herd, and the flock, there will be a devastating plague.
4 And Jehovah will certainly make a distinction between the livestock of Israel and the livestock of Egypt, and nothing that belongs to the Israelites will die.”’”
5 Moreover, Jehovah set an appointed time, saying: “Tomorrow Jehovah will do this in the land.”
6 And Jehovah did this on the very next day, and all sorts of livestock of Egypt began to die, but not one of Israel’s livestock died.
7 When Pharʹaoh inquired, look! not so much as one of Israel’s livestock had died. Nevertheless, Pharʹaoh’s heart continued to be unresponsive, and he did not send the people away.
8 Jehovah then said to Moses and Aaron: “Fill both of your hands with soot from a kiln, and Moses must throw it into the air in front of Pharʹaoh.
9 And it will become a fine dust on all the land of Egypt, and it will become festering boils on man and beast in all the land of Egypt.”
10 So they took soot from a kiln and stood before Pharʹaoh, and Moses tossed it into the air, and it became festering boils breaking out on man and beast.
11 The magic-practicing priests were unable to stand before Moses because of the boils, for they had developed on the magic-practicing priests and on all the Egyptians.
12 But Jehovah allowed Pharʹaoh’s heart to become obstinate, and he did not listen to them, just as Jehovah had told Moses.
13 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Get up early in the morning and station yourself in front of Pharʹaoh, and say to him, ‘This is what Jehovah the God of the Hebrews has said: “Send my people away so that they may serve me.
14 For now I am directing all my blows to strike your heart, your servants, and your people, so that you may know that there is no one like me in all the earth.
15 For by now I could have thrust my hand out to strike you and your people with a devastating plague, and you would have been wiped out from the earth.
16 But for this very reason I have kept you in existence: to show you my power and to have my name declared in all the earth.
17 Are you still behaving arrogantly against my people by not sending them away?
18 Here I will cause a very great hail to rain down tomorrow about this time, such as has never occurred in Egypt from the day it was founded until now.
19 Therefore, send word to bring all your livestock and all that is yours in the field under shelter. Every man and beast caught in the field and not brought into the house will die when the hail comes down on them.”’”
20 Anyone among Pharʹaoh’s servants who feared Jehovah’s word quickly brought his own servants and his livestock into the houses,
21 but whoever did not take Jehovah’s word to heart left his servants and his livestock in the field.
22 Jehovah now said to Moses: “Stretch out your hand toward the heavens, so that hail may come down on all the land of Egypt, on man and beast and all the vegetation of the field in the land of Egypt.”
23 So Moses stretched out his rod toward the heavens, and Jehovah sent thunder and hail, and fire fell down to the earth, and Jehovah kept making it rain down hail on the land of Egypt.
24 There was hail, and there was fire flashing in the midst of the hail. It was very heavy; there had never been any like it in the land since Egypt had become a nation.
25 The hail struck everything in the field throughout the land of Egypt, from man to beast, and it struck down all the vegetation and shattered all the trees of the field.
26 Only in the land of Goʹshen, where the Israelites were, there was no hail.
27 So Pharʹaoh sent for Moses and Aaron and said to them: “I have sinned this time. Jehovah is righteous, and I and my people are in the wrong.
28 Plead with Jehovah that there may be an end to God’s thunder and hail. Then I will be willing to send you away, and you will not stay any longer.”
29 So Moses said to him: “As soon as I go out of the city, I will spread out my hands before Jehovah. The thunder will stop and the hail will not continue any longer, so that you may know that the earth belongs to Jehovah.
30 But as for you and your servants, I know already that even then, you will not fear Jehovah God.”
31 Now the flax and the barley had been struck down, because the barley was in the ear and the flax had flower buds.
32 But the wheat and the spelt had not been struck down, because they were later crops.
33 Moses now went out of the city from Pharʹaoh and spread out his hands before Jehovah, and the thunder and the hail stopped and the rain quit pouring down on the earth.
34 When Pharʹaoh saw that the rain, the hail, and the thunder had stopped, he sinned again and hardened his heart, he as well as his servants.
35 And Pharʹaoh’s heart continued obstinate, and he did not send the Israelites away, just as Jehovah had stated through Moses.
10 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Go in to Pharʹaoh, for I have allowed his heart and the hearts of his servants to become unresponsive, so that I may display these signs of mine right before him,
2 and in order that you may declare to your sons and your grandsons how severely I have dealt with Egypt and what signs I have performed among them; and you will certainly know that I am Jehovah.”
3 So Moses and Aaron went in to Pharʹaoh and said to him: “This is what Jehovah the God of the Hebrews has said, ‘How long will you refuse to submit to me? Send my people away so that they may serve me.
4 For if you keep refusing to send my people away, here I am bringing locusts within your boundaries tomorrow.
5 And they will cover the surface of the earth, and it will not be possible to see the ground. They will eat up what escaped the hail and was left for you, and they will eat all your trees that are growing in the field.
6 They will fill your houses, the houses of all your servants, and the houses of all Egypt to an extent that your fathers and your grandfathers never saw from the time they have been in this land until today.’” With that he turned and went out from Pharʹaoh.
7 Then Pharʹaoh’s servants said to him: “How long will this man continue to menace us? Send the men away so that they may serve Jehovah their God. Do you not yet realize that Egypt has been ruined?”
8 So Moses and Aaron were brought back to Pharʹaoh, and he said to them: “Go, serve Jehovah your God. But just who will be going?”
9 Then Moses said: “We will go with our young people, our old people, our sons, our daughters, our sheep, and our cattle, because we will hold a festival to Jehovah.”
10 He said to them: “If I ever send you and your children away, then Jehovah is indeed with you! It is clear that you intend to do something evil.
11 No! Only your men may go and serve Jehovah, for that is what you requested.” With that they were driven out from before Pharʹaoh.
12 Jehovah now said to Moses: “Stretch out your hand over the land of Egypt for the locusts, so that they may come up over the land of Egypt and eat up all the vegetation of the land, everything that the hail has let remain.”
13 At once Moses stretched out his rod over the land of Egypt, and Jehovah caused an east wind to blow on the land all that day and all night. The morning came, and the east wind brought the locusts.
14 And the locusts came up over all the land of Egypt and settled down on the whole territory of Egypt. It was extremely severe; never before had there been so many locusts, nor would there ever be so many again.
15 They covered the surface of the entire land, and the land grew dark with them; they devoured all the vegetation of the land and all the fruit of the trees that the hail had left; nothing green was left on the trees or on the vegetation of the field in all the land of Egypt.
16 So Pharʹaoh quickly called Moses and Aaron and said: “I have sinned against Jehovah your God and against you.
17 Now, please, pardon my sin just this once, and plead with Jehovah your God that he just remove this deadly plague from upon me.”
18 So he went out from Pharʹaoh and pleaded with Jehovah.
19 Then Jehovah caused the wind to shift, and it became a very stiff west wind, and it carried the locusts away and drove them into the Red Sea. Not a single locust remained in all the territory of Egypt.
20 However, Jehovah allowed Pharʹaoh’s heart to become obstinate, and he did not send the Israelites away.
21 Jehovah then said to Moses: “Stretch out your hand toward the heavens so that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt, a darkness so thick that it can be felt.”
22 Moses immediately stretched out his hand toward the heavens, and there was a dense darkness in all the land of Egypt for three days.
23 They did not see one another, and none of them got up from where they were for three days; but all the Israelites had light in their dwellings.
24 Pharʹaoh then called Moses and said: “Go, serve Jehovah. Only your sheep and your cattle will remain behind. Even your children may go with you.”
25 But Moses said: “You yourself will also provide us with sacrifices and burnt offerings, and we will offer them to Jehovah our God.
26 Our livestock will also go with us. Not an animal will be allowed to remain, because we will be using some of them to worship Jehovah our God, and we do not know what we will offer in worship to Jehovah until we arrive there.”
27 So Jehovah allowed Pharʹaoh’s heart to become obstinate, and he did not consent to send them away.
28 Pharʹaoh said to him: “Get out of my sight! Make sure that you do not try to see my face again, for on the day you see my face, you will die.”
29 To this Moses said: “Just as you have spoken, I will not try to see your face again.”
11 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “One more plague I am going to bring upon Pharʹaoh and Egypt. After that he will send you away from here. When he does send you away, he will literally drive you out of here.
2 Now tell the people that all the men and women should ask their neighbor for articles of silver and of gold.”
3 And Jehovah gave the people favor in the eyes of the Egyptians. Moreover, Moses himself had become highly esteemed in the land of Egypt among Pharʹaoh’s servants and among the people.
4 Moses then said: “This is what Jehovah has said, ‘About midnight I am going out into the midst of Egypt,
5 and every firstborn in the land of Egypt will die, from the firstborn of Pharʹaoh who is sitting on his throne to the firstborn of the slave girl who is working at the hand mill, and every firstborn of the livestock.
6 Throughout all the land of Egypt, there will be a great outcry such as has never occurred nor will ever occur again.
7 But not even a dog will bark at the Israelites, at the men or their livestock, so that you may know that Jehovah can make a distinction between the Egyptians and the Israelites.’
8 And all your servants will certainly come down to me and prostrate themselves to me, saying, ‘Go, you and all the people who follow you.’ And after that I will go out.” With that he went out from Pharʹaoh in the heat of anger.
9 Jehovah then said to Moses: “Pharʹaoh will not listen to you, in order for my miracles to be multiplied in the land of Egypt.”
10 Moses and Aaron performed all these miracles before Pharʹaoh, but Jehovah allowed Pharʹaoh’s heart to become obstinate, so that he did not send the Israelites away from his land.
13 Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying:
2 “Sanctify to me every firstborn male among the Israelites. The first male to be born, of both human and animal, belongs to me.”
3 Then Moses said to the people: “Remember this day on which you went out of Egypt, from the house of slavery, because with a mighty hand Jehovah brought you out of here. So nothing leavened may be eaten.
4 You are going out on this day, in the month of Aʹbib.
5 When Jehovah has brought you into the land of the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Amʹor·ites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites, which he swore to your forefathers to give you, a land flowing with milk and honey, then you must keep this observance in this month.
6 Seven days you are to eat unleavened bread, and on the seventh day, there will be a festival to Jehovah.
7 Unleavened bread is to be eaten for the seven days; and nothing leavened is to be found with you, and no sourdough is to be found with you within all your territory.
8 And you must tell your son on that day, ‘It is because of what Jehovah did for me when I came out of Egypt.’
9 And this will serve for you as a sign on your hand and as a memorial on your forehead, so that Jehovah’s law may be in your mouth, for with a mighty hand Jehovah brought you out of Egypt.
10 You must keep this statute at its appointed time from year to year.
11 “When Jehovah brings you into the land of the Caʹnaan·ites, which he has sworn to you and to your forefathers to give to you,
12 you must devote to Jehovah every firstborn male, as well as every male firstling of the livestock that you acquire. The males belong to Jehovah.
13 Every firstling donkey you are to redeem with a sheep, and if you do not redeem it, then you must break its neck. And every firstborn male of your sons you are to redeem.
14 “In case your son should ask you later on, ‘What does this mean?’ then you should say to him, ‘With a mighty hand Jehovah brought us out of Egypt, from the house of slavery.
15 When Pharʹaoh stubbornly refused to send us away, Jehovah killed every firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of man to the firstborn of beast. That is why I am sacrificing to Jehovah all the firstborn males, and I redeem every firstborn of my sons.’
16 This must serve as a sign on your hand and as a headband on your forehead, for with a mighty hand Jehovah brought us out of Egypt.”
17 Now when Pharʹaoh sent the people away, God did not lead them by the way of the land of the Phi·lisʹtines, although it was near. For God said: “The people may change their minds when they are confronted by war and will return to Egypt.”
18 So God made the people go around by the way of the wilderness of the Red Sea. But it was in battle formation that the Israelites went up out of the land of Egypt.
19 Moses also took Joseph’s bones with him, because Joseph had made the sons of Israel solemnly swear: “God will not fail to turn his attention to you, and you must take my bones up out of here with you.”
20 They departed from Sucʹcoth and encamped at Eʹtham, at the edge of the wilderness.
21 Now Jehovah was going ahead of them by day in a pillar of cloud to lead them along the way, and by night in a pillar of fire to give them light, so that they could travel by day and by night.
22 The pillar of cloud would not move away from before the people during the day, nor the pillar of fire at night.
17 The entire assembly of the Israelites departed from the wilderness of Sin by stages according to the order of Jehovah, and they camped at Rephʹi·dim. But there was no water for the people to drink.
2 So the people began quarreling with Moses and saying: “Give us water to drink.” But Moses said to them: “Why are you quarreling with me? Why do you keep putting Jehovah to the test?”
3 But the people were very thirsty for water there, and they kept murmuring against Moses and saying: “Why have you brought us up out of Egypt to kill us and our sons and our livestock with thirst?”
4 Finally Moses cried out to Jehovah: “What should I do with this people? A little longer and they will stone me!”
5 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Go ahead of the people, and take with you some of the elders of Israel and your rod with which you struck the Nile River. Take it in your hand and walk on.
6 Look! I will be standing before you there on the rock in Hoʹreb. You must strike the rock, and water will come out of it, and the people will drink it.” Moses did so before the eyes of the elders of Israel.
7 So he named the place Masʹsah and Merʹi·bah because of the quarreling of the Israelites and because they put Jehovah to the test by saying: “Is Jehovah in our midst or not?”
8 Then the A·malʹek·ites came and fought against Israel in Rephʹi·dim.
9 At this Moses said to Joshua: “Choose men for us and go out to fight against the A·malʹek·ites. Tomorrow I will stand on top of the hill, with the rod of the true God in my hand.”
10 Then Joshua did just as Moses told him, and he fought against the A·malʹek·ites. And Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of the hill.
11 As long as Moses kept his hands lifted up, the Israelites prevailed, but as soon as he would let down his hands, the A·malʹek·ites prevailed.
12 When the hands of Moses were heavy, they took a stone and put it under him, and he sat on it. Then Aaron and Hur, one on each side, supported his hands, so that his hands remained steady until the sun set.
13 Thus Joshua defeated Amʹa·lek and his people with the sword.
14 Jehovah now said to Moses: “Write this as a memorial in the book and repeat it to Joshua, ‘I will completely wipe out the memory of Amʹa·lek from under the heavens.’”
15 Then Moses built an altar and named it Je·hoʹvah-nisʹsi,
16 saying: “Because his hand is against the throne of Jah, Jehovah will have war with Amʹa·lek from generation to generation.”
18 Now Jethʹro the priest of Midʹi·an, Moses’ father-in-law, heard about all that God had done for Moses and for his people Israel, how Jehovah had brought Israel out of Egypt.
2 Jethʹro, Moses’ father-in-law, had taken in Zip·poʹrah, Moses’ wife, when she was sent back to him,
3 along with her two sons. One son was named Gerʹshom, because Moses said, “I have become a foreign resident in a foreign land,”
4 and the other was named E·li·eʹzer, because he said, “The God of my father is my helper, who rescued me from Pharʹaoh’s sword.”
5 So Jethʹro, Moses’ father-in-law, along with Moses’ sons and his wife, came to Moses into the wilderness where he was camping at the mountain of the true God.
6 Then he sent word to Moses: “I, your father-in-law Jethʹro, am coming to you with your wife and her two sons.”
7 At once Moses went out to meet his father-in-law, and he bowed down and kissed him. Each of them asked about the other’s welfare, and then they went into the tent.
8 Moses related to his father-in-law all that Jehovah had done to Pharʹaoh and Egypt in behalf of Israel, all the hardships that had befallen them along the way, and how Jehovah had delivered them.
9 Jethʹro rejoiced over all the good that Jehovah had done for Israel by rescuing them from Egypt.
10 Then Jethʹro said: “Praised be Jehovah, who rescued you from Egypt and from Pharʹaoh, and who rescued the people from under Egypt’s control.
11 Now I know that Jehovah is greater than all the other gods, because of what he did to those who acted arrogantly against his people.”
12 Then Jethʹro, Moses’ father-in-law, brought a burnt offering and sacrifices for God, and Aaron and all the elders of Israel came to eat a meal with Moses’ father-in-law before the true God.
13 On the next day, Moses sat down as usual to serve as judge for the people, and the people kept standing before Moses from morning until evening.
14 When Moses’ father-in-law saw all that he was doing for the people, he said: “What is this that you are doing for the people? Why do you sit here alone with all the people standing before you from morning until evening?”
15 Moses said to his father-in-law: “Because the people keep coming to me to inquire of God.
16 When a case arises, it comes to me and I must judge between one person and the other, and I make known the decisions of the true God and his laws.”
17 Moses’ father-in-law said to him: “What you are doing is not good.
18 You will surely wear out, both you and this people who are with you, because this is too big a load for you and you cannot carry it by yourself.
19 Now listen to me. I will give you advice, and God will be with you. You serve as representative for the people before the true God, and you must bring the cases to the true God.
20 You should warn them about what the regulations and the laws are and make known to them the way in which they should walk and the work that they should do.
21 But you should select from the people capable men fearing God, trustworthy men hating dishonest profit, and appoint these over them as chiefs over thousands, chiefs over hundreds, chiefs over fifties, and chiefs over tens.
22 They should judge the people when cases arise, and they will bring every difficult case to you, but every minor case they will decide. Make it easier for yourself by letting them share the load along with you.
23 If you do this, and God so commands you, you will be able to stand the strain, and everyone will go home satisfied.”
24 Moses immediately listened to his father-in-law and did all that he had said.
25 Moses chose capable men out of all Israel and appointed them heads over the people, as chiefs of thousands, chiefs of hundreds, chiefs of fifties, and chiefs of tens.
26 So they judged the people when cases arose. A difficult case they would bring to Moses, but every minor case they would judge.
27 After that Moses saw his father-in-law off, and he went his way to his land.
19 In the third month after the Israelites went out of the land of Egypt, on the same day, they came to the wilderness of Siʹnai.
2 They pulled away from Rephʹi·dim and came to the wilderness of Siʹnai and camped in the wilderness. Israel camped there in front of the mountain.
3 Then Moses went up to the true God, and Jehovah called to him from the mountain, saying: “This is what you are to say to the house of Jacob and to tell the Israelites,
4 ‘You have seen for yourselves what I did to the Egyptians, in order to carry you on wings of eagles and bring you to myself.
5 Now if you will strictly obey my voice and keep my covenant, you will certainly become my special property out of all peoples, for the whole earth belongs to me.
6 You will become to me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation.’ These are the words that you are to say to the Israelites.”
7 So Moses went and summoned the elders of the people and declared to them all these words that Jehovah had commanded him.
8 After that all the people answered unanimously: “All that Jehovah has spoken, we are willing to do.” Moses immediately took the people’s response to Jehovah.
9 And Jehovah said to Moses: “Look! I am coming to you in a dark cloud, so that the people may hear when I speak with you and so that they may always put faith in you as well.” Then Moses reported the words of the people to Jehovah.
10 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Go to the people and sanctify them today and tomorrow, and they must wash their clothing.
11 And they must be ready for the third day, because on the third day Jehovah will come down upon Mount Siʹnai before the eyes of all the people.
12 You must set boundaries for the people all around it and tell them, ‘Beware of going up to the mountain or touching its border. Anybody touching the mountain will surely be put to death.
13 No hand is to touch him, but he will either be stoned or be shot through. Whether beast or man, he will not live.’ But at the sound of the ram’s horn they may come up to the mountain.”
14 Then Moses went down from the mountain to the people, and he began to sanctify the people, and they washed their clothing.
15 He said to the people: “Get ready for the third day. Abstain from sexual relations.”
16 On the morning of the third day, there was thunder and lightning, and there was a heavy cloud on the mountain and a very loud sound of a horn, and all the people in the camp began to tremble.
17 Moses now brought the people out of the camp to meet the true God, and they took their place at the base of the mountain.
18 Mount Siʹnai smoked all over, because Jehovah came down upon it in fire; and its smoke was rising like the smoke of a kiln, and the whole mountain was trembling violently.
19 As the sound of the horn grew louder and louder, Moses spoke, and the voice of the true God answered him.
20 So Jehovah came down upon Mount Siʹnai to the top of the mountain. Then Jehovah called Moses to the top of the mountain, and Moses went up.
21 Jehovah now said to Moses: “Go down and warn the people not to try to force their way through to look at Jehovah, or many of them will perish.
22 And let the priests who regularly come near to Jehovah sanctify themselves, so that Jehovah may not strike them.”
23 Moses then said to Jehovah: “The people are not able to come up to Mount Siʹnai because you already warned us, saying, ‘Set boundaries around the mountain, and make it sacred.’”
24 However, Jehovah said to him: “Go, descend, and come back up, you and Aaron with you, but do not let the priests and the people force their way through to come up to Jehovah, so that he may not strike them.”
25 So Moses descended to the people and told them.
20 Then God spoke all these words:
2 “I am Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery.
3 You must not have any other gods besides me.
4 “You must not make for yourself a carved image or a form like anything that is in the heavens above or on the earth below or in the waters under the earth.
5 You must not bow down to them nor be enticed to serve them, for I, Jehovah your God, am a God who requires exclusive devotion, bringing punishment for the error of fathers upon sons, upon the third generation and upon the fourth generation of those who hate me,
6 but showing loyal love to the thousandth generation of those who love me and keep my commandments.
7 “You must not take up the name of Jehovah your God in a worthless way, for Jehovah will not leave unpunished the one who takes up His name in a worthless way.
8 “Remember the Sabbath day to keep it sacred.
9 You are to labor and do all your work for six days,
10 but the seventh day is a sabbath to Jehovah your God. You must not do any work, neither you nor your son nor your daughter nor your slave man nor your slave girl nor your domestic animal nor your foreign resident who is inside your settlements.
11 For in six days Jehovah made the heavens and the earth, the sea, and all that is in them, and he began to rest on the seventh day. That is why Jehovah blessed the Sabbath day and made it sacred.
12 “Honor your father and your mother, so that you may live a long time in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you.
13 “You must not murder.
14 “You must not commit adultery.
15 “You must not steal.
16 “You must not testify falsely when you are a witness against your fellow man.
17 “You must not desire your fellow man’s house. You must not desire your fellow man’s wife nor his slave man nor his slave girl nor his bull nor his donkey nor anything that belongs to your fellow man.”
18 Now all the people were witnessing the thunder and lightning, the sound of the horn, and the mountain smoking; and seeing this made them tremble and stand at a distance.
19 So they said to Moses: “You speak with us, and we will listen, but do not let God speak with us, for fear that we will die.”
20 So Moses said to the people: “Do not be afraid, for the true God has come to put you to the test, in order that the fear of him may continue with you so that you may not sin.”
21 So the people kept standing at a distance, but Moses went near to the dark cloud where the true God was.
22 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “This is what you are to say to the Israelites, ‘You have seen for yourselves that I spoke with you from heaven.
23 You must not make gods of silver alongside me, and you must not make gods of gold for yourselves.
24 An altar of earth you are to make for me, and you will sacrifice on it your burnt offerings, your communion sacrifices, your flock, and your herd. In every place where I cause my name to be remembered I will come to you and I will bless you.
25 If you make an altar of stones for me, you must not build it using stones cut with tools. For if you do use your chisel on it, you will profane it.
26 And you must not go up by steps to my altar, that your private parts may not be exposed upon it.’
22 “If a man steals a bull or a sheep and he slaughters or sells it, he is to compensate with five bulls for the bull and four sheep for the sheep.
2 (“If a thief is found in the act of breaking in and he gets struck and dies, there is no bloodguilt for him.
3 But if it happens after sunrise, there is bloodguilt for him.) “He must make compensation. If he has nothing, then he must be sold for the things he stole.
4 If what he stole is found alive in his possession, whether it is a bull or a donkey or a sheep, he is to make double compensation.
5 “If anyone puts his animals out to graze in a field or a vineyard and lets them graze in someone else’s field, he is to make compensation with the best of his own field or with the best of his own vineyard.
6 “If a fire starts and spreads to thornbushes and it causes sheaves or standing grain or a field to be consumed, the one who started the fire must make compensation for what was burned.
7 “If a man gives his fellow man money or articles to keep and these are stolen from the fellow man’s house, if the thief is found, he must make double compensation.
8 If the thief is not found, the owner of the house must be brought before the true God in order to determine whether he put his hand on the goods of his fellow man.
9 In all cases of illegal possession of goods, concerning a bull, a donkey, a sheep, a garment, or anything lost of which he may say, ‘This is mine!’ both parties will present their case before the true God. The one whom God pronounces guilty is to make double compensation to his fellow man.
10 “If a man gives his fellow man a donkey or a bull or a sheep or any domestic animal to keep and it dies or gets maimed or gets led away while nobody is looking,
11 there should be an oath made between them before Jehovah, that he did not lay his hand on the goods of his fellow man; and the owner must accept it. The other man is not to make compensation.
12 But if the animal has been stolen from him, he is to make compensation to its owner.
13 If it was torn by a wild animal, he is to bring it as evidence. He is not to make compensation for something torn by a wild animal.
14 “But if anybody asks to borrow an animal from his fellow man and it gets maimed or it dies while its owner is not with it, the man who borrowed it must make compensation.
15 If its owner is with it, he is not to make compensation. If it was hired, the money paid for the hire is the compensation.
16 “Now if a man seduces a virgin who is not engaged and he lies down with her, he must pay the bride-price for her to become his wife.
17 If her father absolutely refuses to give her to him, he is to pay the money at the rate of the bride-price.
18 “You must not allow a sorceress to live.
19 “Anyone lying down with an animal must surely be put to death.
20 “Whoever sacrifices to any gods but Jehovah alone is to be devoted to destruction.
21 “You must not mistreat a foreign resident or oppress him, for you were foreign residents in the land of Egypt.
22 “You must not afflict any widow or fatherless child.
23 If you afflict him at all, so that he cries out to me, I will unfailingly hear his outcry;
24 and my anger will blaze, and I will kill you with the sword, and your wives will become widows, and your children will be fatherless.
25 “If you lend money to anyone poor of my people, someone who is dwelling with you, you must not become like a moneylender to him. You must not charge him interest.
26 “If you seize the garment of your fellow man as security for a loan, you are to return it to him by sunset.
27 For it is his only covering, his clothing to cover his body; in what will he lie down to sleep? When he cries out to me, I will certainly hear, for I am compassionate.
28 “You must not curse God nor curse a chieftain among your people.
29 “You must not hesitate to make offerings from your abundant produce and the overflow of your presses. The firstborn of your sons you are to give to me.
30 This is what you should do with your bull and your sheep: Seven days it will continue with its mother. On the eighth day, you are to give it to me.
31 “You should prove yourselves holy people to me, and you must not eat the flesh of anything in the field that has been torn by a wild animal. You should throw it to the dogs.
23 “You must not spread a report that is not true. Do not cooperate with a wicked one by becoming a malicious witness.
2 You must not follow after the crowd to do evil, and you must not pervert justice by giving testimony to go along with the crowd.
3 You must show impartiality in the dispute of a poor person.
4 “If you come upon your enemy’s bull or his donkey straying, you must return it to him.
5 If you see that the donkey of someone who hates you has fallen under its load, you must not ignore it and leave. You must help him release the animal.
6 “You are not to pervert the judgment of the poor one among you in his legal case.
7 “Have nothing to do with a false accusation, and do not kill the innocent and the righteous, for I will not declare the wicked one righteous.
8 “You must not accept a bribe, for the bribe blinds clear-sighted men and can distort the words of righteous men.
9 “You must not oppress a foreign resident. You know how it feels to be a foreigner, because you were foreign residents in the land of Egypt.
10 “You are to sow your land with seed and gather its produce for six years.
11 But the seventh year you should leave it uncultivated and let it lie fallow, and the poor among your people will eat of it, and what they leave, the wild animals of the field will eat. That is what you should do with your vineyard and your olive grove.
12 “Six days you are to do your work; but on the seventh day, you are to cease from your labor, in order that your bull and your donkey may rest and the son of your slave girl and the foreign resident may refresh themselves.
13 “You must be careful to do all that I have said to you, and you must not mention the names of other gods; they should not be heard on your lips.
14 “Three times a year you are to celebrate a festival to me.
15 You will observe the Festival of Unleavened Bread. You will eat unleavened bread for seven days, just as I have commanded you, at the appointed time in the month of Aʹbib, for at that time you came out of Egypt. No one is to appear before me empty-handed.
16 Also, you are to observe the Festival of Harvest of the first ripe fruits of your labors, of what you sow in the field; and the Festival of Ingathering at the end of the year, when you gather in from the field the results of your labors.
17 Three times a year all your men are to appear before the true Lord, Jehovah.
18 “You must not offer the blood of my sacrifice with anything leavened. And the sacrifices of fat offered at my festivals should not stay overnight until the morning.
19 “You are to bring the best of the first ripe fruits of your ground to the house of Jehovah your God. “You must not boil a young goat in its mother’s milk.
20 “I am sending an angel ahead of you to guard you on the way and to bring you into the place that I have prepared.
21 Pay attention to him, and obey his voice. Do not rebel against him, for he will not pardon your transgressions, because my name is in him.
22 However, if you strictly obey his voice and do all that I say, I will show hostility to your enemies and oppose those who oppose you.
23 For my angel will go ahead of you and will bring you to the Amʹor·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites, and I will annihilate them.
24 You must not bow down to their gods or be persuaded to serve them, and you must not imitate their practices. Instead, you must demolish them and smash their sacred pillars.
25 You must serve Jehovah your God, and he will bless your bread and your water. I will remove sickness from among you.
26 The women in your land will not suffer a miscarriage or be barren, and I will give you a full life span.
27 “I will send the fear of me ahead of you, and I will throw into confusion all the people you encounter, and I will cause all your enemies to flee from you in defeat.
28 I will send the feeling of dejection ahead of you, and it will drive the Hiʹvites, the Caʹnaan·ites, and the Hitʹtites out from before you.
29 I will not drive them out from before you in one year, so that the land does not become desolate and the wild animals of the field multiply against you.
30 Little by little I will drive them out from before you, until you become fruitful and take possession of the land.
31 “I will set your boundary from the Red Sea to the sea of the Phi·lisʹtines and from the wilderness to the River; for I will give the inhabitants of the land into your hand, and you will drive them out from before you.
32 You must not make a covenant with them or their gods.
33 They should not dwell in your land, so that they may not cause you to sin against me. If you should serve their gods, it would surely become a snare to you.”
25 Jehovah then said to Moses:
2 “Tell the people of Israel to take up a contribution for me; from every person whose heart moves him, you are to take up my contribution.
3 This is the contribution that you are to accept from them: gold, silver, copper,
4 blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, fine linen, goat hair,
5 ram skins dyed red, sealskins, acacia wood,
6 oil for the lamps, balsam for the anointing oil and the perfumed incense,
7 and onyx stones and other stones to be set in the ephʹod and the breastpiece.
8 They are to make a sanctuary for me, and I will reside among them.
9 You are to make it, the tabernacle and all its furnishings, following exactly the pattern that I am showing you.
10 “They are to make an ark of acacia wood, two and a half cubits long and a cubit and a half wide and a cubit and a half high.
11 Then you will overlay it with pure gold. Inside and outside you are to overlay it, and you will make a border of gold all around it.
12 And you will cast four rings of gold for it and attach them above its four feet, with two rings on one side and two rings on the other side.
13 And you will make poles of acacia wood and overlay them with gold.
14 You will put the poles through the rings on the sides of the Ark in order to carry the Ark with them.
15 The poles will stay in the rings of the Ark; they are not to be removed from it.
16 You will place in the Ark the Testimony that I will give you.
17 “You will make a cover of pure gold, two and a half cubits long and a cubit and a half wide.
18 You are to make two cherubs of gold; you will make them of hammered work on the two ends of the cover.
19 Make the cherubs on the two ends, one cherub on each end of the cover.
20 The cherubs are to spread out their two wings upward, overshadowing the cover with their wings, and they will face each other. The faces of the cherubs will be turned toward the cover.
21 You will put the cover on the Ark, and in the Ark you will place the Testimony that I will give you.
22 I will present myself to you there and speak with you from above the cover. From between the two cherubs that are on the ark of the Testimony, I will make known to you all that I will command you for the Israelites.
23 “You will also make a table of acacia wood, two cubits long and a cubit wide and a cubit and a half high.
24 You will overlay it with pure gold and make a golden border around it.
25 You will make a rim around it a handbreadth wide and a border of gold to go around the rim.
26 You will make for it four rings of gold and place the rings on the four corners, where the four legs are attached.
27 The rings are to be close to the rim as holders for the poles for carrying the table.
28 You will make the poles of acacia wood and overlay them with gold and carry the table with them.
29 “You will also make its dishes, its cups, its pitchers, and its bowls from which they will pour drink offerings. You are to make them out of pure gold.
30 And you will put the showbread on the table before me constantly.
31 “You will make a lampstand of pure gold. The lampstand is to be made of hammered work. Its base, its stem, its branches, its cups, its knobs, and its blossoms will be one piece.
32 And six branches will extend out from the sides of the lampstand, three branches from one side and three branches from the other side.
33 Three cups shaped like almond flowers will be on the one set of branches, with knobs and blossoms alternating, and three cups shaped like almond flowers on the other set of branches, with knobs and blossoms alternating. This is how the six branches will extend out from the stem of the lampstand.
34 On the stem of the lampstand are four cups shaped like almond flowers, with its knobs and its blossoms alternating.
35 A knob will be under the first two branches that extend out of the stem and a knob under the next two branches and a knob under the next two branches, for the six branches extending out from the stem.
36 The knobs and the branches and the whole lampstand are to be one piece of pure, hammered gold.
37 You will make seven lamps for it, and when the lamps are lit, they will shine on the area in front of it.
38 Its snuffers and its fire holders are to be of pure gold.
39 It should be made, along with these utensils, from a talent of pure gold.
40 See that you make them after their pattern that was shown to you on the mountain.
29 “This is what you are to do to sanctify them to serve as priests to me: Take a young bull, two unblemished rams,
2 unleavened bread, unleavened ring-shaped loaves mixed with oil, and unleavened wafers spread with oil. You are to make them with fine wheat flour
3 and put them in a basket and present them in the basket, along with the bull and the two rams.
4 “You will present Aaron and his sons at the entrance of the tent of meeting and wash them with water.
5 Then you are to take the garments and clothe Aaron with the robe, the sleeveless coat of the ephʹod, the ephʹod, and the breastpiece, and you are to tie the woven belt of the ephʹod securely around his waist.
6 You will put the turban on his head and put the holy sign of dedication on the turban;
7 and take the anointing oil and pour it on his head and anoint him.
8 “Then bring his sons forward and clothe them with the robes
9 and wrap the sashes around them, Aaron as well as his sons, and put on their headgear; and the priesthood will become theirs as a permanent statute. This is how you should install Aaron and his sons to serve as priests.
10 “You are now to present the bull before the tent of meeting, and Aaron and his sons will lay their hands on the bull’s head.
11 Slaughter the bull before Jehovah, at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
12 Take some of the bull’s blood on your finger and put it on the horns of the altar, and pour out all the rest of the blood at the base of the altar.
13 Then take all the fat that covers the intestines, the appendage on the liver, and the two kidneys and the fat that is on them, and burn them so that they smoke on the altar.
14 But the bull’s flesh and its skin and its dung, you will burn with fire outside the camp. It is a sin offering.
15 “Then take the one ram, and Aaron and his sons are to lay their hands on the ram’s head.
16 Slaughter the ram and take its blood and sprinkle it on all sides of the altar.
17 Cut the ram into its pieces, and wash its intestines and its shanks, and arrange the pieces together with its head.
18 You must burn the entire ram, making it smoke on the altar. It is a burnt offering to Jehovah, a pleasing aroma. It is an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
19 “Next you are to take the other ram, and Aaron and his sons are to lay their hands on the ram’s head.
20 Slaughter the ram and take some of its blood and put it on Aaron’s right earlobe and on his sons’ right earlobe and on the thumb of their right hand and the big toe of their right foot, and sprinkle the blood on all sides of the altar.
21 Then take some of the blood that is on the altar and some of the anointing oil and spatter it on Aaron and his garments and on his sons and his sons’ garments, so that he and his garments and his sons and their garments may be holy.
22 “Then take from the ram the fat, the fat tail, the fat that covers the intestines, the appendage of the liver, the two kidneys and the fat that is on them, and the right leg, for it is a ram of installation.
23 Take also a round loaf of bread and a ring-shaped loaf of oiled bread and a wafer out of the basket of unleavened bread that is before Jehovah.
24 You must place them all in the hands of Aaron and in the hands of his sons, and you are to wave them back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah.
25 Then you will take them out of their hands and burn them on the altar, on top of the burnt offering, as a pleasing aroma before Jehovah. It is an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
26 “Then take the breast of the ram of installation, which is offered in behalf of Aaron, and wave it back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah, and it will become your portion.
27 You are to sanctify the breast of the wave offering and the leg of the sacred portion that was waved and that was taken from the ram of installation, from what was offered for Aaron and for his sons.
28 It is to become Aaron’s and his sons’ by a permanent regulation to be carried out by the Israelites, for it is a sacred portion, and it will become a sacred portion to be given by the Israelites. It is their sacred portion for Jehovah from their communion sacrifices.
29 “The holy garments that belong to Aaron will be used by his sons after him when they are anointed and installed as priests.
30 The priest from among his sons who succeeds him and who comes into the tent of meeting to minister in the holy place will wear them for seven days.
31 “You will take the ram of installation and boil its flesh in a holy place.
32 Aaron and his sons will eat the flesh of the ram and the bread that is in the basket at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
33 They are to eat the things with which atonement was made to install them as priests and to sanctify them. But an unauthorized person may not eat them, for they are something holy.
34 If any of the flesh of the installation sacrifice and of the bread is left over until the morning, then you must burn what is left with fire. It must not be eaten, for it is something holy.
35 “You are to do this way to Aaron and his sons, according to all that I have commanded you. You will take seven days to install them as priests.
36 You will offer the bull of the sin offering daily for an atonement, and you are to purify the altar from sin by making atonement for it, and you must anoint it to sanctify it.
37 You will take seven days to make atonement for the altar, and you must sanctify it so that it may become a most holy altar. Anyone who touches the altar is to be holy.
38 “This is what you will offer on the altar: two one-year-old rams each day, continually.
39 Offer the one young ram in the morning and the other ram at twilight.
40 A tenth part of an eʹphah measure of fine flour mixed with a fourth of a hin of beaten oil, and a drink offering of a fourth of a hin of wine, will go for the first young ram.
41 You will offer the second young ram at twilight, along with the same grain and drink offerings as in the morning. You will render it as a pleasing aroma, an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
42 It is to be a regular burnt offering throughout your generations at the entrance of the tent of meeting before Jehovah, where I will present myself to you to speak to you there.
43 “I will present myself there to the Israelites, and it will be sanctified by my glory.
44 I will sanctify the tent of meeting and the altar, and I will sanctify Aaron and his sons so that they may serve as priests to me.
45 I will reside among the people of Israel, and I will be their God.
46 And they will certainly know that I am Jehovah their God, who brought them out of the land of Egypt so that I may reside among them. I am Jehovah their God.
31 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying:
2 “See, I have chosen Bezʹal·el the son of Uʹri the son of Hur of the tribe of Judah.
3 I will fill him with the spirit of God, giving him wisdom, understanding, and knowledge of every kind of craftsmanship,
4 for making artistic designs, for working with gold, silver, and copper,
5 for cutting and setting stones, and for making every kind of wood product.
6 Moreover, to assist him I have appointed O·hoʹli·ab the son of A·hisʹa·mach of the tribe of Dan, and I am putting wisdom into the heart of all those who are skillful, so that they may make everything I have commanded you:
7 the tent of meeting, the ark of the Testimony and the cover that is on it, all the utensils of the tent,
8 the table and its utensils, the lampstand of pure gold and all its utensils, the altar of incense,
9 the altar of burnt offering and all its utensils, the basin and its stand,
10 the finely woven garments, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, the garments of his sons to serve as priests,
11 the anointing oil, and the perfumed incense for the sanctuary. They will do everything I have commanded you.”
12 Jehovah said further to Moses:
13 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘Especially, you are to keep my sabbaths, for it is a sign between me and you during your generations in order that you may know that I, Jehovah, am sanctifying you.
14 You must keep the Sabbath, for it is something holy to you. Whoever profanes it must be put to death. If anyone does any work on it, then that person must be cut off from among his people.
15 Six days work may be done, but on the seventh day is a sabbath of complete rest. It is something holy to Jehovah. Anyone doing work on the Sabbath day must be put to death.
16 The Israelites must keep the Sabbath; they must observe the Sabbath during all their generations. It is a lasting covenant.
17 It is an enduring sign between me and the people of Israel, for in six days Jehovah made the heavens and the earth and on the seventh day he rested and refreshed himself.’”
18 Now as soon as he had finished speaking with him on Mount Siʹnai, he gave Moses two tablets of the Testimony, tablets of stone written on by God’s finger.
32 Meanwhile, the people saw that Moses was taking a long time coming down from the mountain. So the people gathered around Aaron and said to him: “Get up, make for us a god who will go ahead of us, because we do not know what has happened to this Moses, the man who led us up out of the land of Egypt.”
2 At this Aaron said to them: “Take the gold earrings from the ears of your wives, your sons, and your daughters and bring them to me.”
3 So all the people began taking off the gold earrings that were in their ears and bringing them to Aaron.
4 Then he took the gold from them, and he formed it with an engraving tool and made it into a statue of a calf. They began to say: “This is your God, O Israel, who led you up out of the land of Egypt.”
5 When Aaron saw this, he built an altar before it. Then Aaron called out: “There is a festival to Jehovah tomorrow.”
6 So they got up early on the next day and began offering up burnt offerings and presenting communion sacrifices. After that the people sat down to eat and drink. Then they got up to have a good time.
7 Jehovah now said to Moses: “Go, descend, because your people, whom you led up out of the land of Egypt, have corrupted themselves.
8 They have quickly deviated from the way I commanded them to go. They have made for themselves a statue of a calf, and they keep bowing down to it and sacrificing to it and saying, ‘This is your God, O Israel, who led you up out of the land of Egypt.’”
9 Jehovah went on to say to Moses: “I have seen that this is an obstinate people.
10 So now let me be, and I will exterminate them in my burning anger, and let me make a great nation from you instead.”
11 Then Moses appealed to Jehovah his God and said: “Why, O Jehovah, should you turn your burning anger against your people after bringing them out of the land of Egypt with great power and with a mighty hand?
12 Why should the Egyptians say, ‘He had evil intentions when he led them out. He wanted to kill them in the mountains and exterminate them from the surface of the earth’? Turn from your burning anger and reconsider your decision to bring this calamity on your people.
13 Remember your servants Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, to whom you swore by yourself and said: ‘I will multiply your offspring like the stars of the heavens, and I will give all this land that I have designated to your offspring, so that they may take it as a permanent possession.’”
14 So Jehovah began to reconsider the calamity that he had spoken of bringing on his people.
15 Moses then turned and went down from the mountain with the two tablets of the Testimony in his hand. The tablets were inscribed on both sides; they were written on the front and on the back.
16 The tablets were the workmanship of God, and the writing was the writing of God engraved on the tablets.
17 When Joshua began to hear the noise of the people because of their shouting, he said to Moses: “There is the sound of battle in the camp.”
18 But Moses said: “It is not the sound of singing over a victory, And it is not the sound of wailing over a defeat; I hear the sound of another kind of singing.”
19 As soon as Moses got near the camp and saw the calf and the dances, his anger began to blaze, and he threw the tablets from his hands and shattered them at the foot of the mountain.
20 He took the calf that they had made and he burned it with fire and crushed it into powder; then he scattered it on the water and made the Israelites drink it.
21 And Moses said to Aaron: “What did this people do to you that you have brought a great sin upon them?”
22 Aaron replied: “Do not be enraged, my lord. You well know that the people are inclined to do evil.
23 So they said to me, ‘Make for us a god who will go ahead of us, for we do not know what has happened to this Moses, the man who led us up out of the land of Egypt.’
24 So I said to them, ‘Whoever has any gold must take it off and give it to me.’ Then I threw it into the fire and out came this calf.”
25 Moses saw that the people were unrestrained, for Aaron had let them go unrestrained, so that they were a disgrace before their opposers.
26 Then Moses took his position in the gate of the camp and said: “Who is on Jehovah’s side? Come to me!” And all the Levites gathered around him.
27 He now said to them: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel has said, ‘Each of you must fasten on his sword and pass through all the camp from gate to gate, killing his brother, his neighbor, and his close companion.’”
28 The Levites did what Moses said. So about 3,000 men were killed on that day.
29 Then Moses said: “Set yourselves apart for Jehovah today, for each of you has gone against his own son and his own brother; today he will give you a blessing.”
30 On the very next day, Moses said to the people: “You committed a very great sin, and now I will go up to Jehovah to see if I can make amends for your sin.”
31 So Moses returned to Jehovah and said: “What a great sin this people has committed! They made themselves a god of gold!
32 But now if you are willing, pardon their sin; if not, please wipe me out from your book that you have written.”
33 However, Jehovah said to Moses: “Whoever has sinned against me, I will wipe him out of my book.
34 Go now, lead the people to the place about which I have spoken to you. Look! My angel will go ahead of you, and on the day when I make an accounting, I will bring punishment on them for their sin.”
35 Then Jehovah began plaguing the people because they had made the calf, the one that Aaron had made.
33 Jehovah said further to Moses: “Go on your way from here with the people whom you led up out of the land of Egypt. Journey to the land about which I swore to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, saying, ‘To your offspring I will give it.’
2 I will send an angel ahead of you and drive out the Caʹnaan·ites, the Amʹor·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites.
3 Go up to a land flowing with milk and honey. But I will not go in the midst of you, for you are an obstinate people, and I might exterminate you on the way.”
4 When the people heard this harsh word, they began to mourn, and not one of them put on his ornaments.
5 Jehovah said to Moses: “Say to the Israelites, ‘You are an obstinate people. In one moment I could go through the midst of you and exterminate you. So now keep your ornaments off while I consider what to do to you.’”
6 So from Mount Hoʹreb onward, the Israelites refrained from wearing their ornaments.
7 Now Moses took his tent and pitched it outside the camp, at some distance from the camp, and he called it a tent of meeting. Everyone inquiring of Jehovah would go out to the tent of meeting, which was outside the camp.
8 As soon as Moses went out to the tent, all the people would rise and stand at the entrance of their own tents, and they would gaze after Moses until he entered into the tent.
9 As soon as Moses would go into the tent, the pillar of cloud would come down and stand at the entrance of the tent while God spoke with Moses.
10 When all the people saw the pillar of cloud standing at the entrance of the tent, each of them rose and bowed down at the entrance of his own tent.
11 Jehovah spoke to Moses face-to-face, just as one man would speak to another man. When he returned to the camp, Joshua the son of Nun, his minister and attendant, would not depart from the tent.
12 Now Moses said to Jehovah: “See, you are saying to me, ‘Lead this people up,’ but you have not let me know whom you will send with me. Moreover, you have said, ‘I know you by name, and you have also found favor in my eyes.’
13 Please, if I have found favor in your eyes, make me know your ways, so that I may know you and continue to find favor in your eyes. Consider, too, that this nation is your people.”
14 So he said: “I myself will go with you, and I will give you rest.”
15 Then Moses said to him: “If you yourself are not going along, do not lead us up from here.
16 How will it be known that I have found favor in your eyes, I and your people? Is it not by your going along with us, so that I and your people will be distinguished from every other people on the face of the earth?”
17 Jehovah went on to say to Moses: “I will also do this thing that you request, because you have found favor in my eyes and I know you by name.”
18 Then he said: “Please show me your glory.”
19 But he said: “I will make all my goodness pass before your face, and I will declare before you the name of Jehovah; and I will favor the one whom I favor, and I will show mercy to the one to whom I show mercy.”
20 But he added: “You cannot see my face, for no man can see me and live.”
21 Jehovah said further: “Here is a place near me. Station yourself on the rock.
22 When my glory is passing by, I will place you in a crevice of the rock, and I will shield you with my hand until I have passed by.
23 After that I will take my hand away, and you will see my back. But my face may not be seen.”
35 Moses later gathered the entire assembly of the Israelites together and said to them: “These are the things that Jehovah has commanded to be done:
2 Work may be done for six days, but the seventh day will become something holy to you, a sabbath of complete rest to Jehovah. Anybody doing work on it will be put to death.
3 You must not light a fire in any of your dwelling places on the Sabbath day.”
4 Moses then said to the entire assembly of the Israelites: “This is what Jehovah has commanded,
5 ‘Take up a contribution for Jehovah from among yourselves. Let everyone with a willing heart bring a contribution for Jehovah: gold, silver, copper,
6 blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, fine linen, goat hair,
7 ram skins dyed red, sealskins, acacia wood,
8 oil for the lamps, balsam for the anointing oil and for the perfumed incense,
9 onyx stones, and other stones for setting in the ephʹod and the breastpiece.
10 “‘Let all who are skilled among you come and make everything that Jehovah has commanded,
11 namely, the tabernacle with its tent and its covering, its clasps and its panel frames, its bars, its pillars, and its socket pedestals;
12 the Ark and its poles, the cover, and the curtain for the screen;
13 the table and its poles and all its utensils and the showbread;
14 the lampstand for light and its utensils and its lamps and the oil for lighting;
15 the altar of incense and its poles; the anointing oil and the perfumed incense; the screen for the tabernacle’s entrance;
16 the altar of burnt offering and its copper grating, its poles and all its utensils; the basin and its stand;
17 the hanging curtains of the courtyard, its pillars and its socket pedestals; the screen of the entrance to the courtyard;
18 the tent pins of the tabernacle and the tent pins of the courtyard and their cords;
19 the finely woven garments for ministering in the sanctuary, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons for serving as priests.’”
20 So all the assembly of the Israelites went out from before Moses.
21 Then everyone whose heart impelled him and everyone whose spirit incited him came and brought their contribution for Jehovah to be used for the tent of meeting, for all its service, and for the holy garments.
22 They kept coming, the men along with the women, each with a willing heart, bringing brooches, earrings, rings, and other jewelry, as well as all sorts of articles of gold. They all presented their offerings of gold to Jehovah.
23 And all who had blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, fine linen, goat hair, ram skins dyed red, and sealskins brought them.
24 All those contributing silver and copper brought Jehovah’s contribution, and all who had acacia wood for any part of the work brought it.
25 All the skilled women spun with their hands, and they brought what they had spun: blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine linen.
26 And all the skilled women whose hearts impelled them spun the goat hair.
27 And the chieftains brought onyx stones and other stones to be set in the ephʹod and the breastpiece,
28 and the balsam and the oil for lighting and for the anointing oil and for the perfumed incense.
29 All the men and women whose hearts incited them brought something for the work that Jehovah, through Moses, had commanded to be done; the Israelites brought it as a voluntary offering to Jehovah.
30 Then Moses said to the Israelites: “See, Jehovah has chosen Bezʹal·el the son of Uʹri the son of Hur of the tribe of Judah.
31 He has filled him with the spirit of God, giving him wisdom, understanding, and knowledge of every sort of craftsmanship
32 for making artistic designs, for working with gold, silver, and copper,
33 for cutting and setting stones, and for making all kinds of artistic wood products.
34 And he has put it into his heart to teach, he and O·hoʹli·ab the son of A·hisʹa·mach of the tribe of Dan.
35 He has filled them with skill to do all the work of a craftsman, an embroiderer, and a weaver using blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine linen, and of a loom worker. These men will do every sort of work and prepare every sort of design.
37 Bezʹal·el then made the Ark of acacia wood. It was two and a half cubits long and a cubit and a half wide and a cubit and a half high.
2 He overlaid it with pure gold inside and outside and made a border of gold around it.
3 After that he cast four rings of gold for it, for above its four feet, with two rings on its one side and two rings on its other side.
4 He next made poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold.
5 Then he put the poles through the rings on the sides of the Ark for carrying the Ark.
6 He made the cover of pure gold. It was two and a half cubits long and a cubit and a half wide.
7 He then made two cherubs of hammered gold on both ends of the cover.
8 One cherub was on one end, and the other cherub on the other end. He made the cherubs on both ends of the cover.
9 The two cherubs spread out their wings upward, overshadowing the cover with their wings. They were facing each other, and their faces were turned toward the cover.
10 He then made the table of acacia wood. It was two cubits long, a cubit wide, and a cubit and a half high.
11 And he overlaid it with pure gold and made a border of gold around it.
12 Next he made a rim the width of a handbreadth to go around it and a border of gold to go around the rim.
13 Further, he cast four rings of gold for it and placed the rings on the four corners where the four legs were attached.
14 The rings were near the rim, as holders for the poles used for carrying the table.
15 Then he made the poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold for carrying the table.
16 After that he made out of pure gold the utensils that went on the table—its dishes, its cups, its bowls, and its pitchers from which drink offerings would be poured.
17 Then he made the lampstand of pure gold. He made the lampstand of hammered work. Its base, its stem, its cups, its knobs, and its blossoms were one piece.
18 Six branches were extending out from its stem, three branches of the lampstand from its one side and three branches from its other side.
19 Three cups shaped like almond flowers were on the one set of branches, with knobs and blossoms alternating, and three cups shaped like almond flowers were on the other set of branches, with knobs and blossoms alternating. This was done for the six branches extending out from the stem of the lampstand.
20 And on the stem of the lampstand were four cups shaped like almond flowers, with knobs and blossoms alternating.
21 There was a knob under the first two branches that extended out of the stem and a knob under the next two branches and a knob under the next two branches, for the six branches extending out from the stem of the lampstand.
22 The knobs and the branches and the whole lampstand were made to be one piece of pure, hammered gold.
23 Then he made its seven lamps and its snuffers and its fire holders out of pure gold.
24 He made it, along with all its utensils, from a talent of pure gold.
25 He now made the altar of incense out of acacia wood. It was square, a cubit long, a cubit wide, and two cubits high. Its horns were one piece with it.
26 He overlaid it with pure gold, its top surface and its sides all around and its horns, and he made a border of gold around it.
27 He made two rings of gold for it below its border on two opposite sides to hold the poles used for carrying it.
28 After that he made the poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold.
29 He also made the holy anointing oil and the pure, perfumed incense, skillfully blended.
40 Then Jehovah said to Moses:
2 “On the first day of the first month, you are to set up the tabernacle, the tent of meeting.
3 Place the ark of the Testimony in it, and screen off the Ark with the curtain.
4 You are to bring the table in and arrange the things that belong on it and bring in the lampstand and light its lamps.
5 Then put the golden altar for incense before the ark of the Testimony and put the screen for the entrance of the tabernacle in place.
6 “You are to put the altar of burnt offering before the entrance of the tabernacle, the tent of meeting,
7 and place the basin between the tent of meeting and the altar and put water in it.
8 Then set up the courtyard around it and put up the screen for the entrance of the courtyard.
9 Next you are to take the anointing oil and anoint the tabernacle and all that is in it, and sanctify it and all its utensils, so that it will become something holy.
10 You are to anoint the altar of burnt offering and all its utensils and sanctify the altar, so that it will become a most holy altar.
11 And anoint the basin and its stand and sanctify it.
12 “Then bring Aaron and his sons near to the entrance of the tent of meeting, and wash them with water.
13 And you are to clothe Aaron with the holy garments and anoint him and sanctify him, and he will serve as priest to me.
14 After that bring his sons near, and clothe them with robes.
15 You are to anoint them just as you anointed their father, so that they will serve as priests to me, and their anointing will serve continually for them as a lasting priesthood during their generations.”
16 Moses did according to all that Jehovah had commanded him. He did just so.
17 In the first month, in the second year, on the first day of the month, the tabernacle was set up.
18 When Moses set up the tabernacle, he put its socket pedestals down, set up the panel frames, put its bars in, and set up its pillars.
19 He spread out the tent over the tabernacle and placed the covering of the tent over it, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
20 After that he took the Testimony and put it into the Ark and placed the poles on the Ark and put the cover on the Ark.
21 He brought the Ark into the tabernacle and put the curtain of the screen in place and screened off the ark of the Testimony, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
22 Next he put the table in the tent of meeting on the north side of the tabernacle outside the curtain,
23 and he arranged the row of bread on it before Jehovah, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
24 He placed the lampstand in the tent of meeting in front of the table, on the south side of the tabernacle.
25 He lit the lamps before Jehovah, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
26 He next placed the golden altar in the tent of meeting before the curtain,
27 in order to make perfumed incense smoke on it, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
28 Then he put the screen for the entrance of the tabernacle in place.
29 He placed the altar of burnt offering at the entrance of the tabernacle, the tent of meeting, so that he might offer up the burnt offering and the grain offering on it, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
30 He then placed the basin between the tent of meeting and the altar and put water in it for washing.
31 Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their feet at it.
32 Whenever they went into the tent of meeting or approached the altar, they would wash, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
33 Finally he set up the courtyard around the tabernacle and the altar and put up the screen for the entrance of the courtyard. So Moses finished the work.
34 And the cloud began to cover the tent of meeting, and Jehovah’s glory filled the tabernacle.
35 Moses was not able to go into the tent of meeting because the cloud remained over it, and Jehovah’s glory filled the tabernacle.
36 And when the cloud lifted from the tabernacle, the Israelites would break camp during all stages of their journey.
37 However, if the cloud did not lift up, then they would not break camp until the day it lifted.
38 For Jehovah’s cloud was over the tabernacle by day, and a fire remained over it by night in the sight of all the house of Israel during all stages of their journey.
1 And Jehovah called Moses and spoke to him from the tent of meeting, saying:
2 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘If any one of you would present an offering to Jehovah from the domestic animals, you should present your offering from the herd or from the flock.
3 “‘If his offering is a burnt offering from the herd, he should present a sound male animal. He should present it of his own free will before Jehovah at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
4 He is to lay his hand on the head of the burnt offering, and it will be accepted in his behalf to make atonement for him.
5 “‘Then the young bull must be slaughtered before Jehovah, and the sons of Aaron, the priests, will present the blood and sprinkle the blood on all sides of the altar, which is at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
6 The burnt offering should be skinned and cut into pieces.
7 The sons of Aaron, the priests, are to put fire on the altar and arrange wood on the fire.
8 The sons of Aaron, the priests, will arrange the pieces of the offering with the head and the suet over the wood that is on the fire on the altar.
9 Its intestines and its shanks will be washed with water, and the priest is to make all of it smoke on the altar as a burnt offering, an offering made by fire of a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
10 “‘If his offering for a burnt offering is from the flock, from the young rams or the goats, he should present a sound male.
11 It is to be slaughtered at the north side of the altar before Jehovah, and the sons of Aaron, the priests, will sprinkle its blood on all sides of the altar.
12 He will cut it up into pieces, and with its head and its suet, the priest will arrange them over the wood on the fire on the altar.
13 He will wash the intestines and the shanks with water, and the priest will present all of it and make it smoke on the altar. It is a burnt offering, an offering made by fire of a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
14 “‘However, if he offers birds as a burnt offering to Jehovah, he will present his offering from the turtledoves or the young pigeons.
15 The priest will present it at the altar and nip off its head and make it smoke on the altar, but its blood should be drained out on the side of the altar.
16 He should remove its crop and its feathers and throw them beside the altar, to the east, to the place for the ashes.
17 He will split it at its wings without dividing it into two parts. Then the priest will make it smoke on the altar over the wood that is on the fire. It is a burnt offering, an offering made by fire of a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
2 “‘Now if someone presents a grain offering to Jehovah, his offering must be fine flour, and he should pour oil on it and put frankincense on it.
2 Then he will bring it to the sons of Aaron, the priests, and the priest will take a handful of the fine flour and oil and all its frankincense, and he will make it smoke as a token offering on the altar, an offering made by fire of a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
3 Whatever is left of the grain offering belongs to Aaron and his sons as something most holy from Jehovah’s offerings made by fire.
4 “‘If you present a grain offering that has been baked in the oven, it should be of fine flour, unleavened ring-shaped loaves mixed with oil or unleavened wafers spread with oil.
5 “‘If your offering is a grain offering from the griddle, it should be of fine, unleavened flour mixed with oil.
6 It should be broken into pieces, and you are to pour oil on it. It is a grain offering.
7 “‘If your offering is a grain offering prepared in a pan, it should be made of fine flour with oil.
8 You should bring the grain offering that was made of these to Jehovah, and it will be presented to the priest, who will bring it near to the altar.
9 And the priest will lift off some of the grain offering as a token offering and make it smoke on the altar as an offering made by fire of a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
10 What is left of the grain offering belongs to Aaron and his sons as something most holy of Jehovah’s offerings by fire.
11 “‘No grain offering that you present to Jehovah should be leavened, for you must not make any sourdough or honey smoke as an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
12 “‘You may present them to Jehovah as an offering of the firstfruits, but they must not be brought to the altar as a pleasing aroma.
13 “‘Every grain offering you make is to be seasoned with salt; and you must not allow the salt of the covenant of your God to be missing from your grain offering. Along with every offering of yours, you will present salt.
14 “‘If you present the grain offering of the first ripe fruits to Jehovah, you should present new grain roasted with fire, coarsely crushed new kernels, as the grain offering of your first ripe fruits.
15 You are to put oil on it and place frankincense on it. It is a grain offering.
16 The priest will make it smoke as a token offering, that is, some of the coarse grain and oil along with all its frankincense, as an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
3 “‘If his offering is a communion sacrifice and if he is presenting it from the herd, whether a male or a female, he should present a sound animal before Jehovah.
2 He is to lay his hand on the head of his offering, and it will be slaughtered at the entrance of the tent of meeting; and Aaron’s sons, the priests, will sprinkle the blood on all sides of the altar.
3 He will present part of the communion sacrifice as an offering made by fire to Jehovah: the fat that covers the intestines, all the fat that surrounds the intestines,
4 and the two kidneys with the fat on them that is near the loins. He will also remove the appendage of the liver along with the kidneys.
5 Aaron’s sons will make it smoke on the altar on top of the burnt offering that is placed on the wood that is over the fire; it is an offering made by fire as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
6 “‘If his offering is from the flock for a communion sacrifice to Jehovah, he will present a sound male or a female animal.
7 If he is presenting a young ram as his offering, then he will present it before Jehovah.
8 He will lay his hand on the head of his offering, and it will be slaughtered in front of the tent of meeting. Aaron’s sons will sprinkle its blood on all sides of the altar.
9 He will present the fat from the communion sacrifice as an offering made by fire to Jehovah. He will remove the entire fat tail near the backbone, the fat that covers the intestines, all the fat that surrounds the intestines,
10 and the two kidneys with the fat on them that is near the loins. He will also remove the appendage of the liver along with the kidneys.
11 And the priest will make it smoke on the altar as food, an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
12 “‘If his offering is a goat, then he will present it before Jehovah.
13 He will lay his hand on its head, and it will be slaughtered before the tent of meeting, and Aaron’s sons must sprinkle its blood on all sides of the altar.
14 The part he will present as his offering made by fire to Jehovah is the fat that covers the intestines, all the fat that surrounds the intestines,
15 and the two kidneys with the fat on them that is near the loins. He will also remove the appendage of the liver along with the kidneys.
16 The priest will make them smoke on the altar as food, an offering made by fire for a pleasing aroma. All the fat belongs to Jehovah.
17 “‘It is a lasting statute for your generations, in all your dwelling places: You must not eat any fat or any blood at all.’”
4 Jehovah went on to say to Moses:
2 “Tell the Israelites, ‘If someone sins unintentionally by doing any of the things that Jehovah commanded should not be done:
3 “‘If the anointed priest sins and brings guilt on the people, then he must present a sound young bull to Jehovah as a sin offering for the sin he committed.
4 He will bring the bull to the entrance of the tent of meeting before Jehovah and lay his hand on the bull’s head, and he is to slaughter the bull before Jehovah.
5 Then the anointed priest will take some of the bull’s blood and bring it into the tent of meeting;
6 and the priest will dip his finger in the blood and spatter some of the blood seven times before Jehovah in front of the curtain of the holy place.
7 The priest will also put some of the blood on the horns of the altar of perfumed incense, which is before Jehovah in the tent of meeting; and he will pour all the rest of the bull’s blood at the base of the altar of burnt offering, which is at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
8 “‘He will then remove all the fat of the bull of the sin offering, including the fat that covers the intestines and the fat that surrounds the intestines,
9 and the two kidneys with the fat on them that is near the loins. And he will remove the appendage of the liver along with the kidneys.
10 It will be the same as what is removed from a bull of the communion sacrifice. And the priest will make them smoke on the altar of burnt offering.
11 “‘But as for the skin of the bull and all its flesh along with its head, its shanks, its intestines, and its dung—
12 all the rest of the bull—he will have it taken to the outskirts of the camp to a clean place where the ashes are discarded, and he will burn it on wood in the fire. It should be burned where the ashes are discarded.
13 “‘Now if the entire assembly of Israel has become guilty by committing a sin unintentionally, but the congregation was unaware that they had done something that Jehovah commanded them not to do,
14 and then the sin becomes known, the congregation must present a young bull for a sin offering and bring it before the tent of meeting.
15 The elders of the assembly will lay their hands on the bull’s head before Jehovah, and the bull will be slaughtered before Jehovah.
16 “‘Then the anointed priest will bring some of the bull’s blood into the tent of meeting.
17 The priest is to dip his finger into the blood and spatter some of it seven times before Jehovah in front of the curtain.
18 He will then put some of the blood on the horns of the altar that is before Jehovah, which is in the tent of meeting; and he will pour all the rest of the blood at the base of the altar of burnt offering, which is at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
19 He will remove all its fat and make it smoke on the altar.
20 He is to do to the bull just as he did to the other bull of the sin offering. That is how he will do it, and the priest will make atonement for them, and they will be forgiven.
21 He will have the bull taken to the outskirts of the camp and will burn it, just as he burned the first bull. It is a sin offering for the congregation.
22 “‘When a chieftain unintentionally sins by doing one of all the things that Jehovah his God commands should not be done and has become guilty,
23 or if he becomes aware of a sin that he has committed against the commandment, then he must bring a sound young male goat as his offering.
24 He will lay his hand on the head of the young goat and slaughter it in the place where the burnt offering is slaughtered before Jehovah. It is a sin offering.
25 The priest will take some of the blood of the sin offering with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and he will pour the rest of its blood at the base of the altar of burnt offering.
26 He will make all its fat smoke on the altar like the fat of the communion sacrifice; and the priest will make atonement for him for his sin, and it will be forgiven him.
27 “‘If any one of the people of the land sins unintentionally and becomes guilty by doing one of the things that Jehovah commands should not be done,
28 or if he becomes aware of a sin that he has committed, then he should bring a sound young female goat as his offering for the sin he has committed.
29 He will lay his hand on the head of the sin offering and slaughter the sin offering in the same place as the burnt offering.
30 The priest will take some of its blood with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and he will pour all the rest of its blood at the base of the altar.
31 He will remove all its fat, just as the fat is removed from the communion sacrifice, and the priest will make it smoke on the altar as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah; and the priest will make atonement for him, and it will be forgiven him.
32 “‘But if he offers a lamb as his sin offering, he should bring a sound female lamb.
33 He will lay his hand on the head of the sin offering and slaughter it as a sin offering in the place where the burnt offering is slaughtered.
34 The priest will take some of the blood of the sin offering with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and he will pour all the rest of its blood at the base of the altar.
35 He will remove all its fat the same way that the fat of the young ram of the communion sacrifice is removed, and the priest will make them smoke on the altar on top of Jehovah’s offerings made by fire; and the priest will make atonement for him for the sin that he has committed, and it will be forgiven him.
5 “‘If someone sins because he has heard a public call to testify and he is a witness or has seen or learned about it and he does not report it, then he will answer for his error.
2 “‘Or when a person touches anything unclean, whether the dead body of an unclean wild animal, an unclean domestic animal, or an unclean swarming creature, he is unclean and has become guilty even if he does not realize it.
3 Or in case someone without being aware of it touches human uncleanness—anything unclean that may make him unclean—and he comes to know it, then he becomes guilty.
4 “‘Or if someone rashly swears to do something—whether it is to do good or to do evil, no matter what it may be—and he was unaware of it, but then he realizes that he has sworn rashly, he becomes guilty.
5 “‘If he becomes guilty as respects one of these things, then he must confess in what way he has sinned.
6 He will also bring his guilt offering to Jehovah for the sin that he committed, namely, a female from the flock, either a female lamb or a young female goat, for a sin offering. Then the priest will make atonement for him for his sin.
7 “‘If, though, he cannot afford a sheep, he must bring to Jehovah two turtledoves or two young pigeons as his guilt offering for the sin, one for a sin offering and one for a burnt offering.
8 He is to bring them to the priest, who will present first the one for the sin offering and nip off its head at the front of its neck, without severing it.
9 He will spatter some of the blood of the sin offering on the side of the altar, but the remainder of the blood will be drained out at the base of the altar. It is a sin offering.
10 He will handle the other one as a burnt offering according to the regular procedure; and the priest will make atonement for him for the sin that he has committed, and it will be forgiven him.
11 “‘Now if he cannot afford two turtledoves or two young pigeons, he must bring as his offering for his sin a tenth of an eʹphah of fine flour for a sin offering. He should not add oil to it or place frankincense on it, for it is a sin offering.
12 He will bring it to the priest, and the priest will take from it his handful as a token offering and make it smoke on the altar on top of Jehovah’s offerings made by fire. It is a sin offering.
13 The priest will make atonement for him for the sin that he has committed, any one of these sins, and it will be forgiven him. The remainder of the offering will become the priest’s, just like the grain offering.’”
14 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying:
15 “If someone behaves unfaithfully by unintentionally sinning against the holy things of Jehovah, he is to bring to Jehovah a sound ram from the flock as a guilt offering; its value in silver shekels is set according to the standard shekel of the holy place.
16 And he will make compensation for the sin he has committed against the holy place and he will also add a fifth of its value. He will give it to the priest, so that the priest may make atonement for him with the ram of the guilt offering, and it will be forgiven him.
17 “If someone sins by doing any of the things that Jehovah commands should not be done, even if he is not aware of it, he is still guilty and will answer for his error.
18 He should bring to the priest a sound ram from the flock according to the estimated value, for a guilt offering. Then the priest will make atonement for him for the unintentional mistake that he unknowingly committed, and it will be forgiven him.
19 It is a guilt offering. He has certainly become guilty of sinning against Jehovah.”
6 Jehovah went on to say to Moses:
2 “If someone sins and behaves unfaithfully toward Jehovah by deceiving his neighbor in connection with something entrusted to him, or something deposited with him, or he robs or defrauds his neighbor,
3 or he finds something lost and is deceptive about it, and if he swears falsely over any such sin he may commit, this is what he should do:
4 If he has sinned and is guilty, he must return what he stole, what he extorted, what he took by fraud, what was entrusted to him, or the lost thing that he found,
5 or anything about which he swore falsely, and he must make full compensation for it, and he will add to it a fifth of its value. He will give it to the owner on the day his guilt is proved.
6 And he will bring to the priest as his guilt offering to Jehovah a sound ram from the flock according to the assessed value, for a guilt offering.
7 The priest will make atonement for him before Jehovah, and he will be forgiven for anything he may have done resulting in his guilt.”
8 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying:
9 “Command Aaron and his sons and say, ‘This is the law of the burnt offering: The burnt offering will remain on the hearth on the altar all night long until the morning, and the fire will be kept burning on the altar.
10 The priest will clothe himself with his official dress of linen, and he will put the linen shorts on over his flesh. Then he will remove the ashes of the burnt offering that the fire had consumed on the altar and place them beside the altar.
11 Then he will take off his garments and put on other garments and take the ashes to a clean place outside the camp.
12 The fire will be kept burning on the altar. It must not go out. The priest must burn wood on it each morning and arrange the burnt offering over it, and he will make the fat of the communion sacrifices smoke over it.
13 Fire will be kept constantly burning on the altar. It must not go out.
14 “‘Now this is the law of the grain offering: You sons of Aaron are to present it before Jehovah in front of the altar.
15 One of them will take a handful from the fine flour of the grain offering and some of its oil and all the frankincense that is on the grain offering, and he will make it smoke on the altar as a pleasing aroma for a token offering to Jehovah.
16 Aaron and his sons will eat what is left of it. It will be eaten as unleavened bread in a holy place. They will eat it in the courtyard of the tent of meeting.
17 It should not be baked with anything leavened. I have given it as their share out of my offerings made by fire. It is something most holy, like the sin offering and like the guilt offering.
18 Every male among the sons of Aaron will eat it. It is their permanent allowance throughout your generations from Jehovah’s offerings made by fire. Everything that touches them will become holy.’”
19 Jehovah spoke again to Moses:
20 “This is the offering that Aaron and his sons will present to Jehovah on the day he is anointed: the tenth of an eʹphah of fine flour as a regular grain offering, half of it in the morning and half of it in the evening.
21 It will be made with oil on a griddle. You will bring it well-mixed with oil and present it in pieces as a baked product of the grain offering as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
22 The anointed priest who succeeds him from among his sons will make it. It is a lasting regulation: As a whole offering it will be made to smoke to Jehovah.
23 Every grain offering of a priest should be a whole offering. It must not be eaten.”
24 Jehovah spoke again to Moses and said:
25 “Tell Aaron and his sons, ‘This is the law of the sin offering: In the place where the burnt offering is slaughtered, the sin offering will also be slaughtered before Jehovah. It is a most holy thing.
26 The priest who offers it for sin will eat it. It will be eaten in a holy place, in the courtyard of the tent of meeting.
27 “‘Everything that touches its flesh will become holy, and when anyone spatters some of its blood on his garment, you should wash what was spattered with blood in a holy place.
28 The earthenware vessel in which it was boiled is to be shattered. But if it was boiled in a copper vessel, then the vessel must be scoured and washed with water.
29 “‘Every male among the priests will eat it. It is something most holy.
30 However, no sin offering is to be eaten if some of its blood is brought into the tent of meeting to make atonement in the holy place. It is to be burned with fire.
7 “‘This is the law of the guilt offering: It is something most holy.
2 They will slaughter the guilt offering in the place where they slaughter the burnt offerings, and its blood should be sprinkled on all sides of the altar.
3 He will present all its fat, including the fat tail, the fat that covers the intestines,
4 and the two kidneys with their fat that is near the loins. He will also remove the appendage of the liver along with the kidneys.
5 The priest will make them smoke on the altar as an offering made by fire to Jehovah. It is a guilt offering.
6 Every male among the priests will eat it, and it should be eaten in a holy place. It is something most holy.
7 The law regarding the sin offering applies to the guilt offering; it belongs to the priest who makes atonement with it.
8 “‘When the priest presents the burnt offering for someone, the skin of the burnt offering that was presented to the priest will become his.
9 “‘Every grain offering that is baked in the oven or prepared in the pan or on the griddle belongs to the priest who presents it. It will become his.
10 But every grain offering that is mixed with oil or that is dry will be for all of Aaron’s sons; each will have an equal share.
11 “‘Now this is the law of the communion sacrifice that one may present to Jehovah:
12 If he presents it as an expression of thanksgiving, he will present along with the thanksgiving sacrifice unleavened ring-shaped loaves mixed with oil, unleavened wafers spread with oil, and ring-shaped loaves made with fine flour, well-mixed and blended with oil.
13 He will present his offering along with ring-shaped loaves of leavened bread and the thanksgiving sacrifice of his communion sacrifices.
14 He is to present from it one of each offering as a sacred portion to Jehovah; it will belong to the priest who sprinkles the blood of the communion sacrifices.
15 The flesh of the thanksgiving sacrifice of his communion sacrifices is to be eaten on the day he offers it. He must not save any of it until morning.
16 “‘If the sacrifice of his offering is a vow or a voluntary offering, it is to be eaten on the day he presents his sacrifice, and what is left of it may also be eaten on the next day.
17 But whatever is left of the flesh of the sacrifice on the third day is to be burned with fire.
18 However, if any of the flesh of his communion sacrifice is eaten on the third day, the one presenting it will not be accepted with approval. It will not be credited to him; it is an offensive thing, and the person who eats some of it will answer for his error.
19 Flesh that touches anything unclean is not to be eaten. It is to be burned with fire. Everyone who is clean may eat the clean flesh.
20 “‘But any person who is unclean and eats the flesh of the communion sacrifice, which is for Jehovah, that person must be cut off from his people.
21 If someone touches anything unclean, whether the uncleanness of a man or an unclean animal or any unclean disgusting thing, and eats some of the flesh of the communion sacrifice, which is for Jehovah, that person must be cut off from his people.’”
22 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying:
23 “Tell the Israelites, ‘You must not eat any fat of a bull or a young ram or a goat.
24 The fat of an animal found dead and the fat of an animal killed by another animal may be used for any other purpose, but you must never eat it.
25 For whoever eats fat from an animal that he presents as an offering made by fire to Jehovah must be cut off from his people.
26 “‘You must not eat any blood in any of your dwelling places, whether that of birds or that of animals.
27 Anyone who eats any blood must be cut off from his people.’”
28 Jehovah went on to speak to Moses, saying:
29 “Tell the Israelites, ‘Whoever presents his communion sacrifice to Jehovah will bring part of the offering from his communion sacrifice to Jehovah.
30 He will bring in his own hands the fat along with the breast as an offering made by fire to Jehovah, and he will wave it back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah.
31 The priest will make the fat smoke on the altar, but the breast will belong to Aaron and his sons.
32 “‘You will give the right leg as a sacred portion to the priest from your communion sacrifices.
33 The son of Aaron who presents the blood of the communion sacrifices and the fat will have the right leg as his portion.
34 For I take the breast of the wave offering and the leg of the sacred portion from the communion sacrifices of the Israelites, and I give them to Aaron the priest and his sons as a lasting regulation for the Israelites.
35 “‘This was the portion from Jehovah’s offerings made by fire to be set aside for the priests, for Aaron and his sons, on the day he presented them to serve as priests to Jehovah.
36 Jehovah commanded to give them this portion from the Israelites on the day he anointed them. It is a permanent statute for their generations.’”
37 This is the law concerning the burnt offering, the grain offering, the sin offering, the guilt offering, the installation sacrifice, and the communion sacrifice,
38 just as Jehovah commanded Moses on Mount Siʹnai in the day he commanded the Israelites to present their offerings to Jehovah in the wilderness of Siʹnai.
8 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying:
2 “Take Aaron and his sons with him, the garments, the anointing oil, the bull of the sin offering, the two rams, and the basket of unleavened bread,
3 and make all the assembly gather together at the entrance of the tent of meeting.”
4 Then Moses did just as Jehovah had commanded him, and the assembly gathered together at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
5 Moses now said to the assembly: “This is what Jehovah has commanded us to do.”
6 So Moses brought Aaron and his sons near and washed them with water.
7 After that he put the robe on him, wrapped him with the sash, clothed him with the sleeveless coat, and put the ephʹod on him and tied it with the woven belt of the ephʹod, binding it securely on him.
8 Next he placed the breastpiece on him and put the Uʹrim and the Thumʹmim in the breastpiece.
9 Then he placed the turban on his head, and he put on the front of the turban the shining plate of gold, the holy sign of dedication, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
10 Moses then took the anointing oil and anointed the tabernacle and all that was in it and sanctified them.
11 After that he spattered some of it seven times on the altar and anointed the altar and all its utensils and the basin and its stand in order to sanctify them.
12 Finally he poured some of the anointing oil on Aaron’s head and anointed him in order to sanctify him.
13 Moses then brought Aaron’s sons near and clothed them with robes and wrapped them with sashes and put headgear on them, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
14 Then he brought the bull of the sin offering, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the bull of the sin offering.
15 Moses slaughtered it and took the blood with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar on all sides, and he purified the altar from sin, but the rest of the blood he poured at the base of the altar, in order to sanctify it to make atonement on it.
16 After that he took all the fat that was on the intestines, the appendage of the liver, and the two kidneys and their fat, and Moses made them smoke on the altar.
17 Then he had the rest of the bull, its skin, its flesh, and its dung, burned with fire outside the camp, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
18 He now brought the ram of the burnt offering near, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the ram.
19 Moses then slaughtered it and sprinkled the blood on all sides of the altar.
20 He cut the ram into its pieces, and Moses made the head, the pieces, and the suet smoke.
21 He washed the intestines and the shanks with water, and Moses made the entire ram smoke on the altar. It was a burnt offering as a pleasing aroma. It was an offering made by fire to Jehovah, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
22 Then he brought the second ram, the ram of the installation, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the ram’s head.
23 Moses slaughtered it and took some of its blood and put it on Aaron’s right earlobe and on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot.
24 Next Moses brought Aaron’s sons forward and put some of the blood on their right earlobe and on the thumb of their right hand and on the big toe of their right foot; but Moses sprinkled the rest of the blood on all sides of the altar.
25 Then he took the fat, the fat tail, all the fat that was on the intestines, the appendage of the liver, the two kidneys and their fat, and the right leg.
26 He took out of the basket of unleavened bread that was before Jehovah one unleavened ring-shaped loaf, one ring-shaped loaf of oiled bread, and one wafer. He then placed them on the pieces of fat and the right leg.
27 After that he put all of them on the palms of Aaron and the palms of his sons and began to wave them back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah.
28 Then Moses took them from their hands and made them smoke on the altar on top of the burnt offering. They were an installation sacrifice as a pleasing aroma. It was an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
29 Moses then took the breast and waved it back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah. From the installation ram it became the portion for Moses, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
30 And Moses took some of the anointing oil and some of the blood that was on the altar and spattered it on Aaron and his garments and on his sons and the garments of his sons who were with him. Thus he sanctified Aaron and his garments and his sons and their garments.
31 Then Moses said to Aaron and his sons: “Boil the flesh at the entrance of the tent of meeting, and you will eat it there with the bread that is in the installation basket, just as I was commanded, ‘Aaron and his sons will eat it.’
32 What is left over of the flesh and the bread you will burn with fire.
33 You must not go out from the entrance of the tent of meeting for seven days, until the days for completing your installation are over, because it will take seven days to install you as priests.
34 Jehovah commanded that we do what we have done today in order to make atonement for you.
35 You will stay at the entrance of the tent of meeting day and night for seven days and carry out your obligation to Jehovah, so that you may not die; for so I have been commanded.”
36 And Aaron and his sons did all the things that Jehovah had commanded by means of Moses.
9 On the eighth day, Moses called Aaron and his sons and the elders of Israel.
2 He said to Aaron: “Take for yourself a young calf for a sin offering and a ram for a burnt offering, sound ones, and present them before Jehovah.
3 But you will say to the Israelites, ‘Take a male goat for a sin offering and a calf and a young ram, each a year old, sound ones, for a burnt offering,
4 and a bull and a ram for communion sacrifices, to sacrifice them before Jehovah, and a grain offering mixed with oil, for today Jehovah will appear to you.’”
5 So they took what Moses had commanded before the tent of meeting. Then the whole assembly came forward and stood before Jehovah.
6 And Moses said: “This is what Jehovah has commanded you to do, so that the glory of Jehovah may appear to you.”
7 Then Moses said to Aaron: “Approach the altar and present your sin offering and your burnt offering, and make atonement in your own behalf and in behalf of your house; and present the offering of the people, and make atonement in their behalf, just as Jehovah has commanded.”
8 Aaron immediately approached the altar and slaughtered the calf of the sin offering that was for him.
9 Then Aaron’s sons presented the blood to him, and he dipped his finger in the blood and put it on the horns of the altar, and he poured the rest of the blood at the base of the altar.
10 He made the fat and the kidneys and the appendage of the liver from the sin offering smoke on the altar, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
11 And he burned the flesh and the skin with fire outside the camp.
12 Then he slaughtered the burnt offering, and Aaron’s sons handed him the blood, and he sprinkled it on all sides of the altar.
13 They handed him the pieces of the burnt offering along with the head, and he made them smoke on the altar.
14 Further, he washed the intestines and the shanks and made them smoke on the burnt offering on the altar.
15 He then presented the offering of the people and took the goat of the sin offering that was for the people and slaughtered it and made a sin offering with it like the first one.
16 And he presented the burnt offering and handled it according to the regular procedure.
17 He next presented the grain offering, filling his hand with some of it and making it smoke on the altar, in addition to the burnt offering of the morning.
18 After that he slaughtered the bull and the ram of the communion sacrifice that was for the people. Then Aaron’s sons handed him the blood, and he sprinkled it around on all sides of the altar.
19 As for the pieces of fat of the bull, the fat tail of the ram, the fat covering the internal organs, the kidneys, and the appendage of the liver,
20 they placed all those pieces of fat on the breasts, after which he made the pieces of fat smoke on the altar.
21 But the breasts and the right leg Aaron waved back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah, just as Moses had commanded.
22 Then Aaron raised his hands toward the people and blessed them and came down from making the sin offering and the burnt offering and the communion sacrifices.
23 Finally Moses and Aaron went into the tent of meeting and came out and blessed the people. Jehovah’s glory now appeared to all the people,
24 and fire came out from Jehovah and began consuming the burnt offering and the pieces of fat on the altar. When all the people saw it, they started shouting and they fell with their faces to the ground.
10 Later Aaron’s sons Naʹdab and A·biʹhu each took his fire holder and put fire in it and placed incense on it. Then they began offering before Jehovah unauthorized fire, which he had not commanded them to do.
2 At this a fire came out from before Jehovah and consumed them, so that they died before Jehovah.
3 Then Moses said to Aaron: “This is what Jehovah has said, ‘I will be made holy among those near to me, and I will be glorified before all the people.’” And Aaron kept silent.
4 So Moses called Mishʹa·el and El·zaʹphan, the sons of Uzʹzi·el, Aaron’s uncle, and said to them: “Come here, carry your brothers from in front of the holy place to a place outside the camp.”
5 So they came forward and carried the men away in their robes to a place outside the camp, just as Moses had told them.
6 Moses then said to Aaron and his other sons El·e·aʹzar and Ithʹa·mar: “Do not let your heads go ungroomed or tear your garments, so that you may not die and that God may not become indignant against all the assembly. Your brothers of the whole house of Israel will weep over those whom Jehovah has killed by the fire.
7 You must not go out from the entrance of the tent of meeting or you will die, for Jehovah’s anointing oil is upon you.” So they did according to Moses’ word.
8 Then Jehovah said to Aaron:
9 “Do not drink wine or other alcoholic beverages, you and your sons with you, when you come into the tent of meeting, so that you will not die. It is a permanent statute for your generations.
10 This is to distinguish between the holy thing and the profane and between the unclean thing and the clean,
11 and to teach the Israelites all the regulations that Jehovah has spoken to them through Moses.”
12 Then Moses spoke to Aaron and to El·e·aʹzar and Ithʹa·mar, his sons who were left: “Take what was left of the grain offering from Jehovah’s offerings made by fire and eat it as unleavened bread near the altar, because it is something most holy.
13 You must eat it in a holy place, because it is your allowance and the allowance of your sons from Jehovah’s offerings made by fire, for this is what I have been commanded.
14 You will also eat the breast of the wave offering and the leg of the sacred portion in a clean place, you and your sons and your daughters with you, because these things have been given as your allowance and the allowance of your sons from the communion sacrifices of the Israelites.
15 They will bring the leg of the sacred portion and the breast of the wave offering along with the offerings of fat made by fire, in order to wave the wave offering back and forth before Jehovah; and it will serve as a permanent allowance for you and your sons with you, just as Jehovah has commanded.”
16 And Moses diligently searched for the goat of the sin offering, and he discovered that it had been burned up. So he grew indignant at El·e·aʹzar and Ithʹa·mar, Aaron’s sons who were left, and he said:
17 “Why did you not eat the sin offering in the holy place, since it is something most holy and he has given it to you so that you may answer for the error of the assembly and make atonement for them before Jehovah?
18 Look! Its blood has not been brought inside the holy place. You certainly should have eaten it in the holy place, just as I was commanded.”
19 Aaron replied to Moses: “Look! Today they presented their sin offering and their burnt offering before Jehovah, and yet these things happened to me. If I had eaten the sin offering today, would that have been pleasing to Jehovah?”
20 When Moses heard that, he was satisfied.
11 Then Jehovah said to Moses and Aaron:
2 “Tell the Israelites, ‘These are the living creatures of the earth that you may eat:
3 Every animal that has a split hoof and a cleft in its hooves and that chews the cud may be eaten.
4 “‘But you must not eat these animals that chew the cud or have a split hoof: the camel, which chews the cud but does not have a split hoof. It is unclean for you.
5 Also the rock badger, because it chews the cud but does not have a split hoof. It is unclean for you.
6 Also the hare, because it chews the cud but does not have a split hoof. It is unclean for you.
7 Also the pig, because it has a split hoof and a cleft in the hoof but does not chew the cud. It is unclean for you.
8 You must not eat any of their flesh or touch their dead body. They are unclean for you.
9 “‘This is what you may eat of everything in the waters: Anything in the waters that has fins and scales, whether in the seas or in the rivers, it you may eat.
10 But anything in the seas and in the rivers that has no fins and scales, among all the swarming creatures and of every other living creature that is in the waters, it is a loathsome thing for you.
11 Yes, they should be loathsome to you, and you must not eat any of their flesh and you must loathe their carcasses.
12 Everything in the waters that has no fins and scales is a loathsome thing to you.
13 “‘These are the flying creatures that you are to loathe; they should not be eaten, for they are loathsome: the eagle, the osprey, the black vulture,
14 the red kite and every kind of black kite,
15 every kind of raven,
16 the ostrich, the owl, the gull, every kind of falcon,
17 the little owl, the cormorant, the long-eared owl,
18 the swan, the pelican, the vulture,
19 the stork, every kind of heron, the hoopoe, and the bat.
20 Every winged swarming creature that goes on all fours is something loathsome to you.
21 “‘Of the winged swarming creatures that move on all fours, you may eat only those that have jointed legs above their feet for leaping on the ground.
22 Of these you may eat: various kinds of migratory locusts, other edible locusts, crickets, and grasshoppers.
23 All other winged swarming creatures with four legs are something loathsome to you.
24 By these you would make yourselves unclean. Everyone touching their dead bodies will be unclean until the evening.
25 Anyone carrying any of their dead bodies should wash his garments; he will be unclean until the evening.
26 “‘Any animal that has a split hoof but does not have a cleft and does not chew its cud is unclean to you. Everyone touching them will be unclean.
27 Every living creature that walks on paws among the creatures that walk on all fours is unclean to you. Everyone touching their dead bodies will be unclean until the evening.
28 The one who carries their dead bodies should wash his garments, and he will be unclean until the evening. They are unclean to you.
29 “‘These are the swarming creatures of the earth that are unclean to you: the mole rat, the mouse, every kind of lizard,
30 the gecko, the large lizard, the newt, the sand lizard, and the chameleon.
31 These swarming creatures are unclean to you. Everyone touching their dead bodies will be unclean until the evening.
32 “‘Now anything they fall on when they die will be unclean, whether a wooden utensil, a garment, a skin, or a piece of sackcloth. Any utensil that is used should be immersed in water, and it will be unclean until the evening; then it will be clean.
33 If they fall into an earthenware vessel, you are to smash it, and anything that was in it will be unclean.
34 Any kind of food that comes in contact with water from such a vessel will be unclean, and any drinkable liquid in such a vessel will be unclean.
35 Anything their dead bodies fall on will be unclean. Whether oven or small stove, it should be broken into pieces. They are unclean, and they will remain unclean to you.
36 Only a spring and a cistern for storing water will continue clean, but anyone touching their dead bodies will be unclean.
37 If their dead bodies fall on a plant seed that is to be sown, it is clean.
38 But if water is put on a seed and part of their dead body falls on it, the seed is unclean to you.
39 “‘Now if an animal that you use for food dies, whoever touches its dead body will be unclean until the evening.
40 Whoever eats any of its dead body should wash his garments, and he will be unclean until the evening. Whoever carries off its dead body should wash his garments, and he will be unclean until the evening.
41 Every swarming creature of the earth is something loathsome. It must not be eaten.
42 You must not eat any creature that crawls on its belly, any creature that goes on all fours, or any of earth’s swarming creatures with a great number of legs, for they are something loathsome.
43 Do not make yourselves loathsome by means of any swarming creature, and do not defile yourselves and become unclean by them.
44 For I am Jehovah your God, and you must sanctify yourselves and become holy, because I am holy. So you must not make yourselves unclean by any swarming creature that moves on the earth.
45 For I am Jehovah, who is leading you up out of the land of Egypt to prove myself God to you, and you must be holy, because I am holy.
46 “‘This is the law about the animals, the flying creatures, every living creature that moves through the waters, and concerning every creature that swarms on the earth,
47 in order to make a distinction between the unclean and the clean and between the living creatures that may be eaten and those that may not be eaten.’”
13 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses and Aaron, saying:
2 “If a man develops on his skin a swelling, a scab, or a blotch and it could become the disease of leprosy on his skin, he must then be brought to Aaron the priest or to one of his sons, the priests.
3 The priest will examine the infection on his skin. When the hair in the infection has turned white and the appearance of the infection is deeper than the skin, it is the disease of leprosy. The priest will examine it and declare him unclean.
4 But if the blotch on his skin is white and its appearance is not deeper than the skin and the hair has not turned white, the priest will then quarantine the infected person for seven days.
5 The priest will then examine him on the seventh day, and if it appears that the infection has stopped and has not spread on the skin, the priest will quarantine him for another seven days.
6 “The priest should examine him again on the seventh day, and if the infection has faded and has not spread in the skin, the priest will declare him clean; it was only a scab. The man will then wash his garments and be clean.
7 But if the scab has definitely spread on the skin after he appears before the priest to establish his purification, he will then appear again before the priest.
8 The priest will examine it, and if the scab has spread in the skin, the priest will then declare him unclean. It is leprosy.
9 “If the disease of leprosy develops in a man, he must then be brought to the priest,
10 and the priest will examine him. If there is a white swelling on the skin and it has turned the hair white and there is an open sore in the swelling,
11 it is chronic leprosy on his skin, and the priest will declare him unclean. He should not quarantine him, for he is unclean.
12 Now if the leprosy breaks out all over the skin and the leprosy covers the person with the disease from head to foot, as far as the priest can see,
13 and the priest has examined him and sees that the leprosy has covered all his skin, he will then declare the infected person clean. All of it has turned white, and he is clean.
14 But whenever an open sore appears in it, he will be unclean.
15 When the priest sees the open sore, he will declare him unclean. The open sore is unclean. It is leprosy.
16 But if the open sore again turns white, he will then come to the priest.
17 The priest will examine him, and if the infection has turned white, the priest will then declare the infected person clean. He is clean.
18 “If a person develops a boil on his skin and it heals,
19 but in the place of the boil a white swelling or a reddish-white blotch has developed, he must then show himself to the priest.
20 The priest will examine it, and if it appears to be deeper than the skin and its hair has turned white, the priest will then declare him unclean. It is the disease of leprosy that has broken out in the boil.
21 But if the priest examines it and sees that there is no white hair in it and it is not deeper than the skin and appears faded, the priest will then quarantine him for seven days.
22 And if it has clearly spread on the skin, the priest will then declare him unclean. It is a disease.
23 But if the blotch stays in one place and has not spread, it is only the inflammation from the boil, and the priest will declare him clean.
24 “Or if someone has a scar from the fire and the raw flesh of the scar becomes a reddish-white blotch or a white one,
25 the priest will then examine it. If the hair in the blotch has turned white and it appears to be deeper than the skin, it is leprosy that has broken out in the scar, and the priest will declare him unclean. It is the disease of leprosy.
26 But if the priest examines it and sees that there is no white hair in the blotch and it is not deeper than the skin and it is faded, the priest will then quarantine him for seven days.
27 The priest will examine him on the seventh day, and if it has clearly spread on the skin, the priest will then declare him unclean. It is the disease of leprosy.
28 But if the blotch stays in one place and has not spread over the skin and it is faded, it is only a swelling of the scar, and the priest will declare him clean, because it is an inflammation of the scar.
29 “When a man or a woman develops an infection on the head or on the chin,
30 the priest will then examine the infection. If it appears to be deeper than the skin and the hair is yellow and thin, the priest will then declare such one unclean; it is an infection of the scalp or the beard. It is leprosy of the head or of the chin.
31 But if the priest sees that the infection does not appear to be deeper than the skin and there is no black hair in it, the priest should quarantine the infected person for seven days.
32 The priest will examine the infection on the seventh day, and if the infected area has not spread and no yellow hair has developed in it and the appearance of the infected area is not deeper than the skin,
33 the person should have himself shaved, but he will not have the infected area shaved. Then the priest will quarantine the infected person for seven days.
34 “The priest will again examine the infected area on the seventh day, and if the infection of the scalp and beard has not spread on the skin and it does not appear deeper than the skin, the priest must then declare him clean, and he should wash his garments and be clean.
35 But if the infection clearly spreads on the skin after his purification,
36 the priest will examine him, and if the infection has spread on the skin, the priest does not need to look for yellow hair; that person is unclean.
37 But if the examination shows that the infection has not spread and black hair has grown on it, the infection has been healed. He is clean, and the priest will declare him clean.
38 “If a man or a woman develops blotches on the skin and the blotches are white,
39 the priest will examine them. If the skin blotches are faded white, it is a harmless rash that has broken out on the skin. That person is clean.
40 “If a man loses the hair of his head and becomes bald, he is clean.
41 If he loses the hair on the front of his head and becomes bald there, he is clean.
42 But if a reddish-white sore develops on the bald part of his scalp or on his forehead, it is leprosy breaking out on his scalp or on his forehead.
43 The priest will examine him, and if the swelling from the infection is reddish-white on the bald spot on top of his head or on his forehead and it looks like leprosy on his skin,
44 he is a leper. He is unclean, and the priest should declare him unclean because of the disease on his head.
45 As for the leper who has the disease, his garments should be torn and his head should be left ungroomed and he should cover over his mustache and call out, ‘Unclean, unclean!’
46 He will be unclean the whole time that he has the disease. Since he is unclean, he should live in isolation. His dwelling place will be outside the camp.
47 “If the disease of leprosy contaminates a garment, whether a woolen or a linen garment,
48 either in the warp or in the woof of the linen or of the wool, or in a skin or in anything made of skin,
49 and the yellowish-green or reddish stain from the disease contaminates the garment, a skin, the warp, the woof, or any article of skin, it is a contamination from leprosy, and it should be shown to the priest.
50 The priest will examine the disease, and he must quarantine the disease for seven days.
51 When he examines the disease on the seventh day and sees that it has spread in the garment, in the warp, in the woof, or in the skin (regardless of what the skin is used for), the disease is malignant leprosy, and it is unclean.
52 He should burn the garment or the warp or the woof in the wool or in the linen or any article of skin in which the disease has developed, for it is malignant leprosy. It should be burned in the fire.
53 “But if the priest examines it and the disease has not spread in the garment or in the warp or in the woof or in any article of skin,
54 the priest will then command that they should wash the contaminated item, and he will quarantine it for another seven days.
55 The priest will then examine the contaminated item after it has been thoroughly washed. If the appearance of the contamination has not changed, even if the disease has not spread, it is unclean. You should burn it in the fire because it has been eaten away, either from its underside or from its outside.
56 “But if the priest has examined it and the contaminated part is faded after it has been thoroughly washed, he will then tear it out of the garment or the skin or the warp or the woof.
57 However, if it still appears in another part of the garment or in the warp or in the woof or in any article of skin, it is spreading, and you should burn any contaminated item in the fire.
58 But when the contamination disappears from the garment or the warp or the woof or any article of skin that you wash, it should then be washed a second time, and it will be clean.
59 “This is the law of the disease of leprosy in a garment of wool or of linen, or in the warp or in the woof, or in any article of skin, for declaring it clean or unclean.”
14 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying:
2 “This is to be the law of the leper on the day his purification is established, when he is to be brought to the priest.
3 The priest will go outside the camp and examine him. If the leper has been cured of the leprosy,
4 the priest will command him to bring two live clean birds, cedarwood, scarlet material, and hyssop for his cleansing.
5 The priest will command that the one bird be killed in an earthenware vessel over running water.
6 But he should take the living bird along with the cedarwood, the scarlet material, and the hyssop, and dip them together in the blood of the bird that was killed over the running water.
7 Then he will spatter it seven times on the one cleansing himself from the leprosy and declare him clean, and he will set the living bird free in the open field.
8 “The one cleansing himself must wash his garments and shave off all his hair and bathe in water, and he will be clean. Afterward, he may come into the camp, but he will dwell outside his tent for seven days.
9 On the seventh day, he should shave off all the hair on his head and his chin and his eyebrows. After he shaves off all his hair, he will wash his garments and bathe himself in water, and he will be clean.
10 “On the eighth day, he will take two sound young rams, one sound female lamb in its first year, three tenths of an eʹphah of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering, and one log measure of oil;
11 and the priest who declares him clean will present the man who is cleansing himself, along with the offerings, before Jehovah at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
12 The priest will take the one young ram and offer it as a guilt offering together with the log measure of oil, and he will wave them back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah.
13 Then he will slaughter the young ram in the place where the sin offering and the burnt offering are usually slaughtered, in a holy place, because, like the sin offering, the guilt offering belongs to the priest. It is something most holy.
14 “Then the priest will take some of the blood of the guilt offering, and the priest will put it on the right earlobe of the one cleansing himself and on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot.
15 And the priest will take some of the log measure of oil and pour it into his own left palm.
16 The priest will then dip his right finger into the oil that is in his left palm and spatter some of the oil with his finger seven times before Jehovah.
17 Then the priest will put some of the remaining oil in his palm on the right earlobe of the one cleansing himself and on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot over the blood of the guilt offering.
18 The priest will put what is left over of the oil in his palm on the head of the one cleansing himself, and the priest will make atonement for him before Jehovah.
19 “The priest will sacrifice the sin offering and make atonement for the one cleansing himself from his impurity, and afterward he will slaughter the burnt offering.
20 And the priest will offer up the burnt offering and the grain offering on the altar, and the priest will make atonement for him, and he will be clean.
21 “However, if he is poor and does not have enough means, he will then take one young ram as a guilt offering for a wave offering, in order to make atonement for himself, along with one tenth of an eʹphah of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering, a log measure of oil,
22 and two turtledoves or two young pigeons, according to his means. The one will serve as a sin offering, and the other as a burnt offering.
23 On the eighth day, he will bring them for establishing his purification to the priest at the entrance of the tent of meeting before Jehovah.
24 “The priest will take the young ram of the guilt offering and the log measure of oil, and the priest will wave them back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah.
25 He will then slaughter the young ram of the guilt offering, and the priest will take some of the blood of the guilt offering and put it on the right earlobe of the one cleansing himself and on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot.
26 The priest will pour some of the oil into his own left palm,
27 and he will then spatter with his right finger some of the oil that is in his left palm seven times before Jehovah.
28 And the priest will put some of the oil that is in his palm on the right earlobe of the one cleansing himself and on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot on the same places that he put the blood of the guilt offering.
29 The priest will then put what is left over of the oil in his palm on the head of the one cleansing himself, in order to make atonement for him before Jehovah.
30 “He will offer up one of the turtledoves or one of the young pigeons, according to his means,
31 the one he can afford, as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering along with the grain offering; and the priest will make atonement for the one cleansing himself before Jehovah.
32 “This is the law for the one in whom the disease of leprosy was but who does not have the means when establishing his purification.”
33 Then Jehovah said to Moses and Aaron:
34 “When you come into the land of Caʹnaan, which I am giving you as a possession, and I contaminate a house in your land with the disease of leprosy,
35 the one to whom the house belongs should then come and tell the priest, ‘Some kind of contamination has appeared in my house.’
36 The priest will give orders to clear out the house before he comes to examine the contamination, in order that he may not declare everything that is in the house unclean; and after that the priest will come in to inspect the house.
37 He will examine the affected area, and if the walls of the house are contaminated with yellowish-green or reddish depressions and they appear to be deeper than the wall surface,
38 the priest will then go out of the house to the entryway of the house and quarantine the house for seven days.
39 “Then the priest will return on the seventh day and make an inspection. If the contamination has spread in the walls of the house,
40 the priest will then give orders, and the contaminated stones must be torn out and thrown outside the city into an unclean place.
41 Then he is to have the inside of the house thoroughly scraped, and the plaster and mortar that is removed should be discarded outside the city in an unclean place.
42 They will then insert other stones in the place of the stones they removed, and he should use different mortar and have the house plastered.
43 “If, though, the contamination returns and breaks out in the house after the stones were torn out and the house was scraped and replastered,
44 the priest will then go in and inspect it. If the contamination has spread in the house, it is malignant leprosy in the house. The house is unclean.
45 He will then have the house pulled down—its stones, its timbers, and all the plaster and mortar of the house—and carried outside the city to an unclean place.
46 But whoever enters the house any of the days it is quarantined will be unclean until the evening;
47 and whoever lies down in the house should wash his garments, and whoever eats in the house should wash his garments.
48 “However, if the priest comes and sees that the contamination has not spread in the house after the house was replastered, the priest will then declare the house clean, because the contamination has been healed.
49 In order to purify the house from uncleanness, he will take two birds, cedarwood, scarlet material, and hyssop.
50 He is to kill the one bird in an earthenware vessel over running water.
51 Then he will take the cedarwood, the hyssop, the scarlet material, and the live bird and dip them in the blood of the bird that was killed and in the running water, and he must spatter it toward the house seven times.
52 And he will purify the house from uncleanness with the blood of the bird, the running water, the live bird, the cedarwood, the hyssop, and the scarlet material.
53 He will then set the live bird free outside the city in the open field and make atonement for the house, and it will be clean.
54 “This is the law respecting any case of leprosy, infection of the scalp or the beard,
55 leprosy of the garment or the house,
56 and respecting swellings, scabs, and blotches,
57 in order to determine when something is unclean and when something is clean. This is the law about leprosy.”
15 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses and Aaron, saying:
2 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘If a man has a discharge from his genital organ, this discharge makes him unclean.
3 He is unclean from the discharge, whether the discharge continues to flow from his genitals or is obstructed, he is still unclean.
4 “‘Any bed that the one with the discharge lies on will be unclean, and anything he sits on will be unclean.
5 A man who touches his bed must wash his garments, and he should bathe in water and be unclean until the evening.
6 Anyone who sits on an article that the one having a discharge sat on should wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening.
7 Whoever touches the flesh of the one having a discharge should wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening.
8 If the one who has a discharge spits on someone clean, that person must wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening.
9 Any saddle that the one with the discharge rides on will be unclean.
10 Anyone touching anything that was under him will be unclean until the evening, and anyone who carries those items will wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening.
11 If the one with the discharge has not washed his hands in water and he touches someone, that person must then wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening.
12 An earthenware vessel that the one having a discharge touches should be smashed, and any wooden vessel should be washed with water.
13 “‘When the discharge stops and the person becomes clean from it, he will then count seven days for his purification, and he must wash his garments, bathe himself in running water, and he will be clean.
14 On the eighth day, he should take two turtledoves or two young pigeons and come before Jehovah at the entrance of the tent of meeting and give them to the priest.
15 And the priest will offer them, the one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering, and the priest will make atonement for him before Jehovah concerning his discharge.
16 “‘Now if a man has an emission of semen, he should bathe his whole body in water and be unclean until the evening.
17 He must wash with water any garment and any skin with semen on it, and it will be unclean until the evening.
18 “‘When a man lies with a woman and has an emission of semen, they should bathe in water and be unclean until the evening.
19 “‘If a woman has a discharge of blood from her body, she will continue in her menstrual impurity for seven days. Anyone touching her will be unclean until the evening.
20 Anything she lies down on in her menstrual impurity will be unclean, and everything she sits on will be unclean.
21 Anyone touching her bed should wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening.
22 Anyone touching any article she sat on should wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening.
23 If she sat on the bed or on another article, his touching it will make him unclean until the evening.
24 And if a man lies down with her and her menstrual impurity comes on him, he will then be unclean for seven days, and any bed on which he lies down will be unclean.
25 “‘When a woman’s discharge of blood flows for many days when it is not the regular time of her menstruation, or if she should have a flow longer than her usual menstruation, she will be unclean during all the days of her discharge, as in the days of her menstrual impurity.
26 Any bed she lies on during the days of her discharge will become like the bed of her menstrual impurity, and any article she sits on will become unclean like the uncleanness of her menstrual impurity.
27 Anyone touching them will be unclean, and he must wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening.
28 “‘However, when she is clean from her discharge, she will count for herself seven days, and afterward she will be clean.
29 On the eighth day, she should take two turtledoves or two young pigeons, and she will bring them to the priest at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
30 The priest will make the one a sin offering and the other a burnt offering, and the priest will make atonement for her before Jehovah concerning her unclean discharge.
31 “‘Thus you must keep the Israelites separate from their uncleanness, so that they do not die in their uncleanness by defiling my tabernacle, which is in their midst.
32 “‘This is the law about the man having a discharge, the man who is unclean because of an emission of semen,
33 the woman during her menstrual impurity, any male or female who has a discharge flowing from the body, and a man who lies down with an unclean woman.’”
16 Jehovah spoke to Moses after the death of Aaron’s two sons who died for approaching Jehovah.
2 Jehovah said to Moses: “Tell Aaron your brother that he may not come at just any time into the holy place inside the curtain, in front of the cover on the Ark, so that he may not die, for I will appear over the cover in a cloud.
3 “This is what Aaron should bring when he comes into the holy place: a young bull for a sin offering and a ram for a burnt offering.
4 He should put on the holy linen robe, and the linen shorts should cover his body, and he should wrap himself with the linen sash and his head with the linen turban. They are holy garments. He will bathe himself in water and put them on.
5 “He should take from the assembly of the Israelites two young male goats for a sin offering and one ram for a burnt offering.
6 “Aaron must then present the bull of the sin offering, which is for himself, and he will make atonement in behalf of himself and his house.
7 “He will then take the two goats and make them stand before Jehovah at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
8 Aaron will draw lots over the two goats, the one lot for Jehovah and the other lot for A·zaʹzel.
9 Aaron will present the goat that was designated by lot for Jehovah and make it a sin offering.
10 But the goat designated by lot for A·zaʹzel should be brought alive to stand before Jehovah in order to perform the atonement upon it, so that it may be sent away for A·zaʹzel into the wilderness.
11 “Aaron will present the bull of the sin offering, which is for himself, and make atonement in behalf of himself and his house; afterward he will slaughter the bull of the sin offering, which is for himself.
12 “He will then take the fire holder full of burning coals from the altar before Jehovah and two handfuls of fine perfumed incense, and he will bring them inside the curtain.
13 He will also put the incense on the fire before Jehovah, and the cloud of the incense will envelop the Ark cover, which is on the Testimony, so that he may not die.
14 “He will take some of the bull’s blood and spatter it with his finger in front of the cover on the east side, and he will spatter some of the blood with his finger seven times before the cover.
15 “He will then slaughter the goat of the sin offering, which is for the people, and bring its blood inside the curtain and do with its blood the same as he did with the bull’s blood; he is to spatter it toward the cover and before the cover.
16 “He must make atonement for the holy place concerning the acts of uncleanness of the Israelites and concerning their transgressions and their sins, and that is what he should do for the tent of meeting, which is located among them in the midst of their acts of uncleanness.
17 “No other man should be in the tent of meeting from the time he goes in to make atonement in the holy place until he comes out. He will make atonement in behalf of himself and his house and in behalf of the entire congregation of Israel.
18 “He will then come out to the altar, which is before Jehovah, and make atonement for it, and he will take some of the bull’s blood and some of the goat’s blood and put it on the horns of the altar on all sides.
19 He will also spatter some of the blood on it with his finger seven times and cleanse it and sanctify it from the acts of uncleanness of the Israelites.
20 “When he has finished making atonement for the holy place and the tent of meeting and the altar, he will also present the live goat.
21 Aaron will lay both his hands on the head of the live goat and confess over it all the errors of the Israelites and all their transgressions and all their sins, and he will put them on the head of the goat and send it away into the wilderness by the hand of a man designated to do this.
22 The goat will carry upon itself all their errors into a desert land, and he will send the goat away into the wilderness.
23 “Aaron will then enter into the tent of meeting and take off the linen garments that he put on when he went into the holy place, and he will lay them down there.
24 He must bathe himself in water in a holy place and put on his garments; then he will come out and offer up his burnt offering and the people’s burnt offering and make atonement in his own behalf and in behalf of the people.
25 He will make the fat of the sin offering smoke on the altar.
26 “The man who sent away the goat for A·zaʹzel should wash his garments and bathe himself in water, and after that he may come into the camp.
27 “And the bull of the sin offering and the goat of the sin offering, whose blood was brought into the holy place to make atonement, will be taken outside the camp, and their skins and their flesh and their dung will be burned in the fire.
28 The one who burns them should wash his garments and bathe himself in water, and after that he may come into the camp.
29 “It will serve as a lasting statute for you: In the seventh month, on the tenth of the month, you should afflict yourselves, and you must not do any work, whether a native or a foreigner who is residing among you.
30 On this day atonement will be made for you, to declare you clean. You will be clean from all your sins before Jehovah.
31 It is a sabbath of complete rest for you, and you should afflict yourselves. It is a lasting statute.
32 “The priest who is anointed and installed to serve as priest in place of his father will make atonement and put on the linen garments, the holy garments.
33 He will make atonement for the holy sanctuary, the tent of meeting, and the altar; and he will make atonement for the priests and for all the people of the congregation.
34 This will serve as a lasting statute for you, to make atonement for the Israelites concerning all their sins once each year.” So he did just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
17 Jehovah went on to say to Moses:
2 “Speak to Aaron and his sons and all the Israelites and say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah has commanded:
3 “‘“If any man of the house of Israel slaughters a bull or a young ram or a goat in the camp or if he slaughters it outside the camp,
4 instead of bringing it to the entrance of the tent of meeting to present it as an offering to Jehovah before the tabernacle of Jehovah, bloodguilt will be counted to that man. He has shed blood, and that man must be cut off from among his people.
5 This is so that the Israelites will bring the sacrifices, which they now sacrifice in the open field, to Jehovah, to the entrance of the tent of meeting, to the priest. They are to sacrifice these as communion sacrifices to Jehovah.
6 And the priest will sprinkle the blood on Jehovah’s altar at the entrance of the tent of meeting and make the fat smoke as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
7 So they should no longer offer sacrifices to the goatlike demons, with which they are prostituting themselves. This will serve as a lasting statute for you throughout your generations.”’
8 “You should say to them, ‘Any man of the house of Israel or any foreigner who is residing in your midst who offers up a burnt offering or a sacrifice
9 and does not bring it to the entrance of the tent of meeting to offer it to Jehovah must be cut off from his people.
10 “‘If any man of the house of Israel or any foreigner who is residing in your midst eats any sort of blood, I will certainly set my face against the one who is eating the blood, and I will cut him off from among his people.
11 For the life of the flesh is in the blood, and I myself have given it on the altar for you to make atonement for yourselves, because it is the blood that makes atonement by means of the life in it.
12 That is why I have said to the Israelites: “None of you should eat blood, and no foreigner who is residing in your midst should eat blood.”
13 “‘If one of the Israelites or some foreigner who is residing in your midst is hunting and catches a wild animal or a bird that may be eaten, he must pour its blood out and cover it with dust.
14 For the life of every sort of flesh is its blood, because the life is in it. Consequently, I said to the Israelites: “You must not eat the blood of any sort of flesh because the life of every sort of flesh is its blood. Anyone eating it will be cut off.”
15 If anyone, whether a native or a foreigner, eats an animal found dead or one torn by a wild animal, he must then wash his garments and bathe in water and be unclean until the evening; then he will be clean.
16 But if he does not wash them and does not bathe himself, he will answer for his error.’”
18 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying:
2 “Speak to the Israelites and say to them, ‘I am Jehovah your God.
3 You must not behave as they do in the land of Egypt, where you were dwelling, and you must not do what they do in the land of Caʹnaan, where I am bringing you. And you must not walk in their statutes.
4 You should carry out my judicial decisions, and you should keep my statutes and walk in them. I am Jehovah your God.
5 You must keep my statutes and my judicial decisions; anyone who does so will live by means of them. I am Jehovah.
6 “‘No man among you should approach any of his close relatives to have sexual relations. I am Jehovah.
7 You must not have sexual relations with your father, and you must not have sexual relations with your mother. She is your mother, and you must not have sexual relations with her.
8 “‘You must not have sexual relations with your father’s wife. It is exposing your father to shame.
9 “‘You must not have sexual relations with your sister, either the daughter of your father or the daughter of your mother, whether she is born in the same household or born outside of it.
10 “‘You must not have sexual relations with the daughter of your son or the daughter of your daughter, because they are your own nakedness.
11 “‘You must not have sexual relations with the daughter of your father’s wife, the offspring of your father, because she is your sister.
12 “‘You must not have sexual relations with your father’s sister. She is your father’s blood relative.
13 “‘You must not have sexual relations with your mother’s sister, because she is your mother’s blood relative.
14 “‘You must not expose your father’s brother to shame by having sexual relations with his wife. She is your aunt.
15 “‘You must not have sexual relations with your daughter-in-law. She is your son’s wife, and you must not have relations with her.
16 “‘You must not have sexual relations with your brother’s wife, because it is exposing your brother to shame.
17 “‘You must not have sexual relations with a woman and her daughter. You must not take the daughter of her son and the daughter of her daughter in order to have relations. They are her close relatives; it is an obscene act.
18 “‘You must not take a woman in addition to her sister as a rival wife and have sexual relations with her while her sister is alive.
19 “‘You must not approach a woman during her menstrual impurity to have sexual relations with her.
20 “‘You must not have sexual intercourse with the wife of your fellow man, making yourself unclean.
21 “‘You must not allow any of your offspring to be offered to Moʹlech. You must not profane the name of your God in that way. I am Jehovah.
22 “‘You must not lie down with a male in the same way that you lie down with a woman. It is a detestable act.
23 “‘A man must not have sexual intercourse with an animal to become unclean by it; nor should a woman offer herself to an animal to have intercourse with it. It is a violation of what is natural.
24 “‘Do not make yourselves unclean by any of these things, for it is by all these things that the nations that I am driving out from before you have made themselves unclean.
25 Therefore, the land is unclean, and I will bring punishment on it for its error, and the land will vomit its inhabitants out.
26 But you yourselves must keep my statutes and my judicial decisions, and you must not do any of these detestable things, whether a native or a foreigner who is residing among you.
27 For all these detestable things were done by the men who lived in the land before you, and now the land is unclean.
28 Then the land will not have to vomit you out for defiling it in the same way that it will vomit out the nations that were before you.
29 If anyone does any of these detestable things, all those doing them must be cut off from among their people.
30 You must keep your obligation to me by not practicing any of the detestable customs that were carried on before you, so that you do not make yourselves unclean by them. I am Jehovah your God.’”
19 Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying:
2 “Speak to the entire assembly of the Israelites and tell them, ‘You should be holy, because I, Jehovah your God, am holy.
3 “‘Each of you should respect his mother and his father, and you should keep my sabbaths. I am Jehovah your God.
4 Do not turn to worthless gods or make for yourselves gods of cast metal. I am Jehovah your God.
5 “‘Now if you offer a communion sacrifice to Jehovah, you should sacrifice it in such a way that you gain approval for yourselves.
6 It should be eaten on the day of your sacrifice and on the next day, but what is left over until the third day should be burned in the fire.
7 If, though, any of it is eaten on the third day, it is an offensive thing that will not be accepted with approval.
8 The one eating it will answer for his error because he has profaned a holy thing of Jehovah, and that person must be cut off from his people.
9 “‘When you reap the harvest of your land, you must not reap the edge of your field completely and you must not pick up the gleaning of your harvest.
10 Also, you must not gather the leftovers of your vineyard or pick up the scattered grapes of your vineyard. You should leave them for the poor and the foreign resident. I am Jehovah your God.
11 “‘You must not steal, you must not deceive, and you must not deal falsely with one another.
12 You must not swear to a lie in my name and thus profane the name of your God. I am Jehovah.
13 You must not defraud your fellow man, and you must not rob. You should not withhold the wages of a hired worker all night until morning.
14 “‘You must not curse a deaf man or put an obstacle before a blind man, and you must be in fear of your God. I am Jehovah.
15 “‘You must not be unjust in your judgment. You must not show partiality to the poor or show preference to the rich. With justice you should judge your fellow man.
16 “‘You must not go around spreading slander among your people. You must not stand up against the life of your fellow man. I am Jehovah.
17 “‘You must not hate your brother in your heart. You should by all means reprove your fellow man, so that you will not bear sin along with him.
18 “‘You must not take vengeance nor hold a grudge against the sons of your people, and you must love your fellow man as yourself. I am Jehovah.
19 “‘You should keep my statutes: You must not interbreed two sorts of your domestic animals. You must not sow your field with two sorts of seed, and you must not wear a garment made with two sorts of thread mixed together.
20 “‘Now if a man lies down with a woman and has intercourse with her and she is a servant who is designated for another man, but she has not been redeemed or given her freedom, there should be a punishment. However, they should not be put to death, for she was not yet set free.
21 He should bring his guilt offering to Jehovah to the entrance of the tent of meeting, a ram of guilt offering.
22 The priest will make atonement for him with the ram of the guilt offering before Jehovah for the sin that he committed, and he will be forgiven for the sin that he committed.
23 “‘When you come into the land and you plant any tree for food, you must consider its fruitage impure and forbidden. For three years it will be forbidden to you. It must not be eaten.
24 But in the fourth year, all its fruit will be holy for rejoicing before Jehovah.
25 Then in the fifth year, you may eat its fruit in order to add its produce to your harvest. I am Jehovah your God.
26 “‘You must eat nothing containing blood. “‘You must not look for omens or practice magic.
27 “‘You must not shave the hair on the side of your head or disfigure the edges of your beard.
28 “‘You must not make cuts in your flesh for a dead person, and you must not make tattoo markings on yourselves. I am Jehovah.
29 “‘Do not dishonor your daughter by making her a prostitute, so that the land may not commit prostitution and be filled with loose morals.
30 “‘You must keep my sabbaths, and you must show reverence for my sanctuary. I am Jehovah.
31 “‘Do not turn to the spirit mediums, and do not consult fortune-tellers so as to become unclean by them. I am Jehovah your God.
32 “‘Before gray hair you should rise up, and you must show honor to an older man, and you must be in fear of your God. I am Jehovah.
33 “‘If a foreigner resides with you in your land, you must not mistreat him.
34 The foreigner who resides with you should become to you like a native among you; and you must love him as yourself, for you were foreign residents in the land of Egypt. I am Jehovah your God.
35 “‘You must not use dishonest standards in measuring length, weight, or volume.
36 You should use accurate scales, accurate weights, an accurate dry measure, and an accurate liquid measure. I am Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt.
37 So you must keep all my statutes and all my judicial decisions, and you must follow them. I am Jehovah.’”
20 Jehovah went on speaking to Moses, saying:
2 “You are to say to the Israelites, ‘Any man of Israel and any foreigner who resides in Israel who gives any of his offspring to Moʹlech should be put to death without fail. The people of the land should stone him to death.
3 I myself will set my face against that man, and I will cut him off from among his people, because he has given some of his offspring to Moʹlech and has defiled my holy place and has profaned my holy name.
4 If the people of the land should deliberately close their eyes to what that man does when he gives his offspring to Moʹlech and they do not put him to death,
5 then I myself will certainly set my face against that man and his family. I will cut off that man from his people along with all who join him in prostituting themselves to Moʹlech.
6 “‘As for the person who turns to the spirit mediums and the fortune-tellers so as to commit spiritual prostitution with them, I will certainly turn against that person and cut him off from his people.
7 “‘You must sanctify yourselves and become holy, because I am Jehovah your God.
8 And you must keep my statutes and carry them out. I am Jehovah, who is sanctifying you.
9 “‘If there is any man who curses his father or his mother, he should be put to death without fail. Since he has cursed his father or his mother, his own blood is upon him.
10 “‘Now regarding a man who commits adultery with another man’s wife: The one who commits adultery with the wife of his fellow man should be put to death without fail, the adulterer and the adulteress.
11 A man who lies down with his father’s wife has exposed his father to shame. Both of them should be put to death without fail. Their own blood is upon them.
12 If a man lies down with his daughter-in-law, both of them should be put to death without fail. They have violated what is natural. Their own blood is upon them.
13 “‘If a man lies down with a male the same as one lies down with a woman, both of them have done a detestable thing. They should be put to death without fail. Their own blood is upon them.
14 “‘If a man takes a woman and her mother, it is an obscene act. They should burn him and them in the fire, so that obscene conduct may not continue among you.
15 “‘If a man has intercourse with a beast, he should be put to death without fail, and you should kill the beast.
16 If a woman approaches any beast to have intercourse with it, you must kill the woman and the beast. They should be put to death without fail. Their own blood is upon them.
17 “‘If a man has sexual relations with his sister, the daughter of his father or the daughter of his mother, and he sees her nakedness and she sees his nakedness, it is a disgrace. They must be cut off before the eyes of the sons of their people. He has exposed his sister to shame. He should answer for his error.
18 “‘If a man lies down with a menstruating woman and has sexual relations with her, both he and she have exposed her flow of blood. Both of them must be cut off from among their people.
19 “‘You must not have sexual relations with your mother’s sister or your father’s sister, because that would be exposing a blood relative to shame. They should answer for their error.
20 A man who lies down with his uncle’s wife has exposed his uncle to shame. They should answer for their sin. They should die childless.
21 If a man takes his brother’s wife, it is something abhorrent. He has exposed his brother to shame. They should become childless.
22 “‘You must keep all my statutes and all my judicial decisions and carry them out, so that the land where I am bringing you to dwell will not vomit you out.
23 You must not walk in the statutes of the nations that I am driving out from before you; for they have done all these things and I abhor them.
24 That is why I said to you: “You will take possession of their land, and I will give it to you as your possession, a land flowing with milk and honey. Jehovah your God I am, who has set you apart from the peoples.”
25 You must make a distinction between the clean animal and the unclean and between the unclean bird and the clean; you must not make yourselves loathsome by means of an animal or a bird or anything that creeps on the ground that I set apart for you to regard as unclean.
26 You must be holy to me, because I, Jehovah, am holy, and I am setting you apart from the peoples to become mine.
27 “‘Any man or woman who acts as a spirit medium or is a fortune-teller should be put to death without fail. The people should stone them to death. Their own blood is upon them.’”
21 Jehovah went on to say to Moses: “Talk to the priests, Aaron’s sons, and say to them, ‘No one should defile himself for a dead person among his people.
2 But he may do so for a close blood relative, for his mother, his father, his son, his daughter, his brother,
3 and he may defile himself for his sister if she is a virgin who is near to him and has not yet married.
4 He may not defile himself and make himself profane for a woman who belongs to a husband of his people.
5 They should not make their heads bald or shave off the fringe of their beard or make cuts on their body.
6 They should be holy to their God, and they should not profane the name of their God, for they are presenting Jehovah’s offerings made by fire, the bread of their God, and they must be holy.
7 They should not marry a prostitute, a woman who has been defiled, or a woman divorced from her husband, because the priest is holy to his God.
8 You must sanctify him, because he is one presenting the bread of your God. He should be holy to you, because I, Jehovah, the one sanctifying you, am holy.
9 “‘Now if the daughter of a priest should profane herself by committing prostitution, she is profaning her father. She should be burned in the fire.
10 “‘The high priest of his brothers, on whose head the anointing oil is poured and who has been installed to wear the priestly garments, should not let his head go ungroomed or tear his garments.
11 He should not approach any dead person; he may not defile himself even for his father or his mother.
12 He should not go out from the sanctuary and should not profane the sanctuary of his God, for the sign of dedication, the anointing oil of his God, is upon him. I am Jehovah.
13 “‘He must take as a wife a woman who is a virgin.
14 He may not marry a widow, a divorced woman, one who has been defiled, or a prostitute; but he should take a virgin from his people as a wife.
15 He should not profane his offspring among his people, for I am Jehovah, who is sanctifying him.’”
16 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying:
17 “Tell Aaron, ‘No man of your offspring throughout their generations who has a defect may approach to present the bread of his God.
18 If there is any man who has a defect, he may not approach: a man who is blind or lame or has a disfigured face or one limb too long,
19 a man with a fractured foot or a fractured hand,
20 a hunchback or a dwarf, or a man with an eye defect or eczema or ringworm or damaged testicles.
21 No man of the offspring of Aaron the priest who has a defect may approach to present Jehovah’s offerings made by fire. Because he has a defect, he may not approach to present the bread of his God.
22 He may eat the bread of his God from the most holy things and from the holy things.
23 However, he may not come near the curtain, and he may not approach the altar, because there is a defect in him; and he should not profane my sanctuary, for I am Jehovah, who is sanctifying them.’”
24 So Moses spoke to Aaron and his sons and all the Israelites.
22 Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying:
2 “Tell Aaron and his sons that they should be careful how they handle the holy things of the Israelites and not profane my holy name regarding the things they are sanctifying to me. I am Jehovah.
3 Say to them, ‘Throughout your generations, any of your offspring who, while he is unclean, comes near to the holy things that the Israelites sanctify to Jehovah, that person will be cut off from before me. I am Jehovah.
4 No man of Aaron’s offspring who has leprosy or a discharge may eat of the holy things until he becomes clean, neither the man who touches someone who became unclean by a dead person, nor a man who has a seminal emission,
5 nor a man who touches an unclean swarming creature or who touches a man who is unclean for any reason and who can make him unclean.
6 The person who touches any of these will be unclean until the evening and may not eat any of the holy things, but he should bathe himself in water.
7 When the sun has set, he will be clean, and afterward he may eat some of the holy things because it is his food.
8 Also, he should not eat any animal found dead or anything torn by wild animals and become unclean by it. I am Jehovah.
9 “‘They must keep their obligation to me, so that they may not incur sin because of it and have to die for it because they were profaning it. I am Jehovah, who is sanctifying them.
10 “‘No unauthorized person may eat anything holy. No foreign guest of a priest or hired worker may eat anything holy.
11 But if a priest should purchase someone with his own money, that person may share in eating it. Slaves born in his house may also share in eating his food.
12 If the daughter of a priest should marry someone who is not a priest, she may not eat of the contribution of the holy things.
13 But if the daughter of a priest should become a widow or is divorced and she has no offspring and she returns to her father’s house as in her youth, she may eat some of her father’s food; but no unauthorized person may eat it.
14 “‘Now if a man eats a holy thing by mistake, he must add a fifth of its value and give the holy offering to the priest.
15 So they should not profane the holy things of the Israelites that they contribute to Jehovah
16 and cause themselves to incur punishment for their guilt because of eating their holy things; for I am Jehovah, who is sanctifying them.’”
17 Jehovah continued speaking to Moses, saying:
18 “Speak to Aaron and his sons and all the Israelites and say to them, ‘When an Israelite man or a foreign resident in Israel presents a burnt offering to Jehovah to fulfill his vows or to make a voluntary offering,
19 he should present a sound male from the herd, the young rams, or the goats, in order to gain approval.
20 You must not present anything with a defect, for it will not serve to gain approval for you.
21 “‘If a man presents a communion sacrifice to Jehovah to pay a vow or as a voluntary offering, it should be a sound animal from the herd or the flock, in order to gain approval. No defect at all should be in it.
22 No offering should be blind, have a fracture, a cut, a wart, scabbiness, or ringworm; you must not present any of these to Jehovah or make such an offering on the altar for Jehovah.
23 You may present a bull or a sheep with a limb that is too long or too short as a voluntary offering, but it will not be accepted with approval as a vow offering.
24 You must not present to Jehovah one having the testicles damaged or crushed or pulled off or cut off, and you should not offer such animals in your land.
25 And you must not present any of these from the hand of a foreigner as the bread of your God, for they are corrupted and defective. They will not be accepted with approval for you.’”
26 Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying:
27 “When a bull or a young ram or a goat is born, it will continue with its mother for seven days, but from the eighth day forward it will be accepted with approval as an offering, an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
28 As for a bull or a sheep, you must not slaughter it and its young on the same day.
29 “If you sacrifice a thanksgiving sacrifice to Jehovah, you should sacrifice it to gain approval for yourselves.
30 It should be eaten on that day. You must not leave any of it until morning. I am Jehovah.
31 “You must keep my commandments and carry them out. I am Jehovah.
32 You must not profane my holy name, and I must be sanctified in the midst of the Israelites. I am Jehovah, who is sanctifying you,
33 the one bringing you out of the land of Egypt to prove myself God to you. I am Jehovah.”
2 Jehovah now spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying:
2 “The Israelites should encamp where their three-tribe division is assigned, each man near the banner of his paternal house. They should camp facing the tent of meeting, all around it.
3 “Those camping on the east side, toward the sunrise, will be the three-tribe division of the encampment of Judah by their companies; the chieftain for the sons of Judah is Nahʹshon the son of Am·minʹa·dab.
4 Those registered in his army are 74,600.
5 Camping alongside him will be the tribe of Isʹsa·char; the chieftain for the sons of Isʹsa·char is Ne·thanʹel the son of Zuʹar.
6 Those registered in his army are 54,400.
7 Next is the tribe of Zebʹu·lun; the chieftain for the sons of Zebʹu·lun is E·liʹab the son of Heʹlon.
8 Those registered in his army are 57,400.
9 “All those registered in the armies of the camp of Judah are 186,400. They should break camp first.
10 “The three-tribe division of the encampment of Reuʹben by their companies will be toward the south; the chieftain for the sons of Reuʹben is E·liʹzur the son of Shedʹe·ur.
11 Those registered in his army are 46,500.
12 Camping alongside him will be the tribe of Simʹe·on; the chieftain for the sons of Simʹe·on is She·luʹmi·el the son of Zu·ri·shadʹdai.
13 Those registered in his army are 59,300.
14 Next is the tribe of Gad; the chieftain for the sons of Gad is E·liʹa·saph the son of Reuʹel.
15 Those registered in his army are 45,650.
16 “All those registered in the armies of the camp of Reuʹben are 151,450, and they should break camp second.
17 “When the tent of meeting is moved, the camp of the Levites should be in the middle of the other camps. “They should travel in the same order as they encamp, with each in his place, according to their three-tribe divisions.
18 “The three-tribe division of the encampment of Eʹphra·im by their companies will be toward the west; the chieftain for the sons of Eʹphra·im is E·lishʹa·ma the son of Am·miʹhud.
19 Those registered in his army are 40,500.
20 Next to him will be the tribe of Ma·nasʹseh; the chieftain for the sons of Ma·nasʹseh is Ga·maʹli·el the son of Pe·dahʹzur.
21 Those registered in his army are 32,200.
22 Next is the tribe of Benjamin; the chieftain for the sons of Benjamin is Abʹi·dan the son of Gid·e·oʹni.
23 Those registered in his army are 35,400.
24 “All those registered in the armies of the camp of Eʹphra·im are 108,100, and they should break camp third.
25 “The three-tribe division of the encampment of Dan by their companies will be toward the north; the chieftain for the sons of Dan is A·hi·eʹzer the son of Am·mi·shadʹdai.
26 Those registered in his army are 62,700.
27 Camping alongside him will be the tribe of Ashʹer; the chieftain for the sons of Ashʹer is Paʹgi·el the son of Ochʹran.
28 Those registered in his army are 41,500.
29 Next is the tribe of Naphʹta·li; the chieftain for the sons of Naphʹta·li is A·hiʹra the son of Eʹnan.
30 Those registered in his army are 53,400.
31 “All those registered in the camp of Dan are 157,600. They should break camp last, according to their three-tribe divisions.”
32 These were the Israelites who were registered according to their paternal houses; the total of those in the camps registered for the army was 603,550.
33 But the Levites did not get registered along with the other Israelites, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
34 The Israelites did everything that Jehovah had commanded Moses. This is how they encamped by their three-tribe divisions and how they broke camp, each by family and according to their paternal houses.
5 Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying:
2 “Command the Israelites to send out of the camp every leprous person and everyone having a discharge and everyone unclean by a dead person.
3 Whether a male or a female, you should send them out. You should send them outside the camp, so that they may not contaminate the camps of those in whose midst I am dwelling.”
4 Therefore, the Israelites did so and sent them outside the camp. Just as Jehovah told Moses, so the Israelites did.
5 Jehovah continued speaking to Moses, saying:
6 “Tell the Israelites, ‘If a man or a woman commits any of the sins of mankind and acts unfaithfully toward Jehovah, that person has become guilty.
7 He must confess the sin that he has committed and return the full amount as compensation for his guilt and also add a fifth of its value; he is to give it to the one he wronged.
8 But if the victim does not have a close relative to receive the compensation, it should be returned to Jehovah and will belong to the priest, apart from the ram of atonement with which he will make atonement for him.
9 “‘Every holy contribution from the Israelites that is presented to the priest should become his.
10 The holy things of each person will remain his own. Whatever each one gives to the priest, that will belong to the priest.’”
11 Jehovah went on to speak to Moses, saying:
12 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘This is what should be done if a man’s wife goes astray and is unfaithful to him
13 and another man has sexual relations with her, but it was unknown to her husband and remains undiscovered, so that she has defiled herself but there is no witness against her and she has not been caught:
14 Whether the husband becomes jealous and suspicious of his wife’s faithfulness when she has defiled herself, or whether he is jealous and suspicious of his wife’s faithfulness when she has not defiled herself,
15 the man must bring his wife to the priest, along with an offering for her, a tenth of an eʹphah of barley flour. He must not pour oil on it nor put frankincense on it, because it is a grain offering of jealousy, a grain offering bringing guilt to mind.
16 “‘The priest will bring her forward and make her stand before Jehovah.
17 The priest will take holy water in an earthenware vessel, and the priest will take some of the dust from the floor of the tabernacle and put it in the water.
18 And the priest will make the woman stand before Jehovah and unbind the woman’s hair and put in her palms the grain offering for a reminder, that is, the grain offering of jealousy, and the priest will have in his hand the bitter water that brings a curse.
19 “‘The priest will then make her swear, saying to the woman: “If no other man had sexual relations with you while you were under your husband’s authority and you have not gone astray and become defiled, may you be free of the effect of this bitter water that brings a curse.
20 But if you have gone astray while under your husband’s authority by defiling yourself, and you have had sexual relations with another man besides your husband—”
21 The priest will then make the woman swear an oath that includes a curse, and the priest will say to the woman: “May Jehovah make you an object for cursing and for an oath among your people, as Jehovah makes your thigh fall away and causes your abdomen to swell.
22 This water that brings a curse will enter into your intestines to cause your abdomen to swell and make your thigh fall away.” To this the woman should say: “Amen! Amen!”
23 “‘Then the priest should write these curses in the book and wash them off into the bitter water.
24 He will then make the woman drink the bitter water that brings a curse, and the water that brings a curse will enter into her and produce bitterness.
25 And the priest should take the grain offering of jealousy from the woman’s hand and wave the grain offering back and forth before Jehovah, and he will bring it near the altar.
26 The priest will take a handful of the grain offering as a token offering and make it smoke on the altar, and afterward he will make the woman drink the water.
27 When he makes her drink the water, if she has defiled herself and committed an act of unfaithfulness toward her husband, the water that brings a curse will then enter into her and become something bitter, and her abdomen will swell, and her thigh will fall away, and the woman will become an object of cursing among her people.
28 However, if the woman has not defiled herself and is clean, she will then be free from such punishment, and she will be able to conceive and produce offspring.
29 “‘This is the law about jealousy, when a woman may go astray and defile herself while under her husband’s authority,
30 or in the case of a man who becomes jealous and suspects his wife of unfaithfulness; he should make his wife stand before Jehovah, and the priest must carry out toward her all this law.
31 The man will be free from guilt, but his wife will answer for her guilt.’”
6 Jehovah spoke further to Moses and said:
2 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘If a man or a woman takes a special vow to live as a Nazʹi·rite to Jehovah,
3 he should keep away from wine and other alcoholic beverages. He should not drink the vinegar of wine or the vinegar of anything alcoholic. He should not drink any liquid made from grapes, nor eat grapes, whether fresh or dried.
4 All the days of his Naziriteship he should not eat anything made from the grapevine, from the unripe grapes to the skins.
5 “‘All the days of the vow of his Naziriteship no razor should pass over his head. He is to remain holy by letting the hair of his head grow until the days of his being set apart to Jehovah are completed.
6 He should not approach a dead person during all the days he remains separated to Jehovah.
7 Even if his father or his mother or his brother or his sister should die, he may not defile himself, because the sign of his Naziriteship to his God is upon his head.
8 “‘He is holy to Jehovah all the days of his Naziriteship.
9 But if someone should suddenly die alongside him and he defiles the hair symbolizing his separation to God, he must shave his head on the day he establishes his purification. He should shave it on the seventh day.
10 And on the eighth day, he should bring two turtledoves or two young pigeons to the priest at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
11 The priest will prepare one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering and make atonement for him for his sin in connection with the dead person. Then he must sanctify his head on that day.
12 And he must separate himself again to Jehovah for the days of his Naziriteship, and he will bring a young ram in its first year as a guilt offering. However, the former days will go uncounted because he defiled his Naziriteship.
13 “‘Now this is the law about the Nazʹi·rite: When he completes the days of his Naziriteship, he will be brought to the entrance of the tent of meeting.
14 There he must present his offering to Jehovah: one sound young ram in its first year as a burnt offering, one sound female lamb in its first year as a sin offering, one sound ram as a communion sacrifice,
15 a basket of unleavened ring-shaped loaves of fine flour mixed with oil, unleavened wafers smeared with oil, and their grain offering and their drink offerings.
16 The priest will present them before Jehovah and will offer up his sin offering and his burnt offering.
17 He will offer the ram as a communion sacrifice to Jehovah along with the basket of unleavened loaves, and the priest will present its grain offering and its drink offering.
18 “‘The Nazʹi·rite must then shave the uncut hair of his head at the entrance of the tent of meeting, and he will take the hair of his head grown during his Naziriteship and put it on the fire that is under the communion sacrifice.
19 And the priest must take a boiled shoulder from the ram, one unleavened ring-shaped loaf from the basket, and one unleavened wafer, and put them on the palms of the Nazʹi·rite after he has had the sign of his Naziriteship shaved off.
20 And the priest must wave them back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah. It is something holy for the priest, along with the breast of the wave offering and the leg of the contribution. Afterward, the Nazʹi·rite may drink wine.
21 “‘This is the law about the Nazʹi·rite who makes a vow: If he vows and can afford to make an offering to Jehovah that is beyond the requirements of his Naziriteship, he must then carry out his vow out of regard for the law of his Naziriteship.’”
22 Then Jehovah said to Moses:
23 “Tell Aaron and his sons, ‘This is the way you should bless the people of Israel. Say to them:
24 “May Jehovah bless you and safeguard you.
25 May Jehovah make his face shine upon you, and may he favor you.
26 May Jehovah lift up his face toward you and grant you peace.”’
27 And they must place my name upon the people of Israel, that I may bless them.”
9 Jehovah spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Siʹnai in the first month of the second year after they had come out of the land of Egypt, saying:
2 “The Israelites should prepare the Passover sacrifice at its appointed time.
3 On the 14th day of this month at twilight, you should prepare it at its appointed time. According to all its statutes and all its set procedures, you should prepare it.”
4 So Moses told the Israelites to prepare the Passover sacrifice.
5 Then they prepared the Passover sacrifice in the first month, on the 14th day of the month at twilight, in the wilderness of Siʹnai. According to all that Jehovah had commanded Moses, so the Israelites did.
6 Now there were men who had become unclean by touching a dead body, so that they were not able to prepare the Passover sacrifice on that day. So those men presented themselves before Moses and Aaron on that day
7 and said to him: “We are unclean because of touching a dead body. Why should we be kept from presenting the offering to Jehovah at its appointed time among the Israelites?”
8 At this Moses said to them: “Wait there, and let me hear what Jehovah may command regarding you.”
9 Then Jehovah said to Moses:
10 “Tell the Israelites, ‘Although any man among you or of your future generations should become unclean by touching a dead body or should be off on a distant journey, he must still prepare the Passover sacrifice to Jehovah.
11 They should prepare it in the second month, on the 14th day at twilight. They should eat it together with unleavened bread and bitter greens.
12 They must not let any of it remain until morning, and they should not break any bone in it. They should prepare it according to every statute regarding the Passover.
13 But if a man was clean or was not off on a journey and neglected to prepare the Passover sacrifice, that person must then be cut off from his people, because he did not present the offering of Jehovah at its appointed time. That man will answer for his sin.
14 “‘And if a foreign resident is residing with you, he should also prepare the Passover sacrifice to Jehovah. He should do so according to the statute of the Passover and its set procedure. There should exist one statute for you, both for the foreign resident and for the native of the land.’”
15 Now on the day the tabernacle was set up, the cloud covered the tabernacle, the tent of the Testimony, but in the evening what appeared to be fire remained over the tabernacle until morning.
16 That is what continued to take place: The cloud would cover it by day, and the appearance of fire by night.
17 Whenever the cloud lifted from the tent, the Israelites would promptly depart, and in the place where the cloud would remain, there is where the Israelites would encamp.
18 At the order of Jehovah the Israelites would depart, and at the order of Jehovah they would encamp. As long as the cloud remained over the tabernacle, they would remain encamped.
19 When the cloud would stay over the tabernacle for many days, the Israelites would obey Jehovah and not depart.
20 Sometimes the cloud would remain for a few days over the tabernacle. At the order of Jehovah they would remain encamped, and at the order of Jehovah they would depart.
21 Sometimes the cloud would remain only from evening until morning, and when the cloud lifted in the morning, they would depart. Whether it was day or night when the cloud lifted, they would depart.
22 Whether it was two days, a month, or longer, as long as the cloud stayed over the tabernacle, the Israelites remained encamped and would not depart. But when it lifted, they would depart.
23 At the order of Jehovah they would encamp, and at the order of Jehovah they would depart. They kept their obligation to Jehovah at the order of Jehovah through Moses.
10 Jehovah then said to Moses:
2 “Make two trumpets for yourself; make them of hammered silver, and use them to summon the assembly and to break up the camps.
3 When both of them are blown, the whole assembly must be summoned to you at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
4 If just one is blown, only the chieftains, the heads of the thousands of Israel, will be summoned to you.
5 “When you sound a fluctuating trumpet blast, the camps of those to the east should depart.
6 When you sound a fluctuating trumpet blast a second time, the camps of those to the south should depart. They should sound the trumpet blasts in this way each time one of them departs.
7 “Now when calling the congregation together, you should blow the trumpets, but not with fluctuating blasts.
8 Aaron’s sons, the priests, should blow the trumpets, and the use of them will serve as a lasting statute for you throughout your generations.
9 “If you should go to war in your land against an oppressor who is harassing you, you should sound a war call on the trumpets, and you will be remembered by Jehovah your God and be saved from your enemies.
10 “Also, on your joyous occasions—your festivals and at the beginning of your months—you are to sound the trumpets over your burnt offerings and your communion sacrifices; they will serve as a reminder for you before your God. I am Jehovah your God.”
11 Now in the second year, in the second month, on the 20th day of the month, the cloud lifted from over the tabernacle of the Testimony.
12 So the Israelites began to pull away from the wilderness of Siʹnai in the order established for their departure, and the cloud settled in the wilderness of Paʹran.
13 This was the first time they departed following the order of Jehovah through Moses.
14 So the three-tribe division of the camp of the sons of Judah departed first by their companies, and Nahʹshon the son of Am·minʹa·dab was over its company.
15 Over the company of the tribe of the sons of Isʹsa·char was Ne·thanʹel the son of Zuʹar.
16 Over the company of the tribe of the sons of Zebʹu·lun was E·liʹab the son of Heʹlon.
17 When the tabernacle was taken down, the sons of Gerʹshon and the sons of Me·rarʹi, who carried the tabernacle, departed.
18 Then the three-tribe division of the camp of Reuʹben departed by their companies, and E·liʹzur the son of Shedʹe·ur was over its company.
19 Over the company of the tribe of the sons of Simʹe·on was She·luʹmi·el the son of Zu·ri·shadʹdai.
20 Over the company of the tribe of the sons of Gad was E·liʹa·saph the son of Deuʹel.
21 Then the Koʹhath·ites, who carried the sanctuary items, departed. The tabernacle was to be set up by the time they arrived.
22 Then the three-tribe division of the camp of the sons of Eʹphra·im departed by their companies, and E·lishʹa·ma the son of Am·miʹhud was over its company.
23 Over the company of the tribe of the sons of Ma·nasʹseh was Ga·maʹli·el the son of Pe·dahʹzur.
24 Over the company of the tribe of the sons of Benjamin was Abʹi·dan the son of Gid·e·oʹni.
25 Then the three-tribe division of the camp of the sons of Dan departed by their companies, forming the rear guard for all the camps, and A·hi·eʹzer the son of Am·mi·shadʹdai was over its company.
26 Over the company of the tribe of the sons of Ashʹer was Paʹgi·el the son of Ochʹran.
27 Over the company of the tribe of the sons of Naphʹta·li was A·hiʹra the son of Eʹnan.
28 This was the order of departure that the Israelites and their companies followed when they would depart.
29 Then Moses said to Hoʹbab the son of Reuʹel the Midʹi·an·ite, the father-in-law of Moses: “We are setting out for the place about which Jehovah said, ‘I will give it to you.’ Do come with us, and we will treat you well, because Jehovah has promised good things for Israel.”
30 But he said to him: “I will not go. I will return to my own country and to my relatives.”
31 At this he said: “Please do not leave us, for you know where we should camp in the wilderness, and you can serve as our guide.
32 And if you do come with us, whatever goodness Jehovah shows to us, we will surely show to you.”
33 So they began marching from the mountain of Jehovah for a journey of three days, and the ark of Jehovah’s covenant traveled before them for the three-day journey to search out a resting-place for them.
34 And Jehovah’s cloud was over them by day when they set out from the encampment.
35 Whenever the Ark was moved, Moses would say: “Rise up, O Jehovah, and let your enemies be scattered, and let those who hate you flee from before you.”
36 And when it would rest, he would say: “Do return, O Jehovah, to the countless thousands of Israel.”
12 Now Mirʹi·am and Aaron began to speak against Moses because of the Cushʹite wife he had married, for he had taken a Cushʹite wife.
2 They were saying: “Is it only by Moses that Jehovah has spoken? Has he not also spoken through us?” And Jehovah was listening.
3 Now the man Moses was by far the meekest of all the men on the face of the earth.
4 Jehovah suddenly said to Moses and Aaron and Mirʹi·am: “Go out, the three of you, to the tent of meeting.” So the three of them went out.
5 And Jehovah came down in the pillar of cloud and stood at the entrance of the tent and called Aaron and Mirʹi·am. Both of them went forward.
6 He then said: “Hear my words, please. If there was a prophet of Jehovah among you, I would make myself known to him in a vision, and I would speak to him in a dream.
7 But it is not that way with my servant Moses! He is being entrusted with all my house.
8 Face-to-face I speak to him, openly, not by riddles; and the appearance of Jehovah is what he sees. Why, then, did you not fear to speak against my servant, against Moses?”
9 So Jehovah’s anger burned against them, and he departed from them.
10 The cloud moved away from over the tent, and look! Mirʹi·am was struck with leprosy as white as snow. Then Aaron turned toward Mirʹi·am, and he saw that she was struck with leprosy.
11 Immediately Aaron said to Moses: “I beg you, my lord! Please do not hold this sin against us! We have acted foolishly in what we have done.
12 Please, do not let her continue like someone dead, whose flesh is half eaten away at birth!”
13 And Moses began to cry out to Jehovah, saying: “O God, please heal her! Please!”
14 Jehovah replied to Moses: “If her father would spit directly in her face, would she not be humiliated for seven days? Let her be quarantined for seven days outside the camp, and afterward she may be brought back in.”
15 So Mirʹi·am was quarantined outside the camp for seven days, and the people did not break camp until Mirʹi·am was brought back in.
16 Then the people departed from Ha·zeʹroth and began camping in the wilderness of Paʹran.
15 Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying:
2 “Speak to the Israelites and say to them, ‘When you eventually come into the land that I am giving you to dwell in
3 and you make an offering by fire to Jehovah from the herd or from the flock—whether a burnt offering or a sacrifice to perform a special vow or a voluntary offering or an offering during your seasonal festivals, in order to make a pleasing aroma to Jehovah—
4 the one presenting his offering must also present to Jehovah a grain offering of fine flour, a tenth of an eʹphah, mixed with a fourth of a hin of oil.
5 You should also offer wine as a drink offering, a fourth of a hin, together with the burnt offering or for the sacrifice of each male lamb.
6 Or for a ram, you should make a grain offering of two tenths of an eʹphah measure of fine flour mixed with a third of a hin of oil.
7 And you should present wine as a drink offering, a third of a hin, as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
8 “‘But if you should offer a male of the herd as a burnt offering or a sacrifice to perform a special vow or communion sacrifices to Jehovah,
9 you should also present together with the male of the herd a grain offering of three tenths of an eʹphah measure of fine flour mixed with half a hin of oil.
10 You should also present wine as a drink offering, half a hin, as an offering made by fire, as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
11 This is what should be done for each bull or for each ram or for each of the male lambs or of the goats.
12 Whatever may be the number that you offer, that is what you should do for each one, according to their number.
13 This is how every native-born Israelite should present an offering made by fire, as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
14 “‘If a foreigner who is residing with you or one who has been in your midst for many of your generations should also make an offering by fire, as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah, he should do just as you do.
15 You who are of the congregation and the foreigner who is residing with you will have one statute. It will be a lasting statute for all your generations. The foreign resident should be the same as you before Jehovah.
16 There should be one law and one judicial decision for you and for the foreigner who is residing with you.’”
17 Jehovah went on to say to Moses:
18 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘When you come into the land where I am bringing you
19 and you eat any of the bread of the land, you should make a contribution to Jehovah.
20 You should make a contribution of the firstfruits of your coarse meal as ring-shaped loaves. Like the contribution of a threshing floor is the way you should contribute it.
21 Some of the firstfruits of your coarse meal you should give as a contribution to Jehovah throughout your generations.
22 “‘Now if you make a mistake and fail to observe all these commandments that Jehovah has spoken to Moses,
23 all that Jehovah has commanded you through Moses from the day that Jehovah commanded and onward for your generations,
24 and if it was done by mistake and without the knowledge of the assembly, the whole assembly must offer one young bull as a burnt offering for a pleasing aroma to Jehovah, together with its grain offering and its drink offering according to the regular procedure, and one young goat as a sin offering.
25 The priest will make atonement for the whole assembly of the Israelites, and it will be forgiven them, because it was a mistake, and they brought as their offering an offering made by fire to Jehovah and their sin offering before Jehovah for their mistake.
26 It will be forgiven the whole assembly of the Israelites and the foreigner who is residing in their midst, because it was by mistake on the part of all the people.
27 “‘If any person should sin by mistake, then he must present a female goat in its first year for a sin offering.
28 And the priest will make atonement for the person who made a mistake by an unintentional sin before Jehovah, so as to make atonement for it, and it will be forgiven him.
29 As for the native-born among the Israelites and the foreigner who is residing in their midst, there should be one law for you in the matter of doing something unintentionally.
30 “‘But the person who does something deliberately, whether he is native-born or a foreign resident, is blaspheming Jehovah and must be cut off from among his people.
31 Because he has despised Jehovah’s word and broken his commandment, that person should be cut off without fail. His own error is upon him.’”
32 While the Israelites were in the wilderness, they found a man collecting pieces of wood on the Sabbath day.
33 Those who found him collecting wood brought him up to Moses and Aaron and the whole assembly.
34 They committed him into custody because it had not been specified what should be done to him.
35 And Jehovah said to Moses: “The man should be put to death without fail, and the whole assembly should stone him outside the camp.”
36 So the whole assembly brought him outside the camp and stoned him so that he died, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
37 Jehovah went on to say this to Moses:
38 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them that they must make for themselves fringed edges on the skirts of their garments throughout their generations, and they are to put a blue string above the fringed edge of the skirt.
39 ‘You must have this fringed edge so that you will see it and remember all the commandments of Jehovah and observe them. You must not follow your own hearts and eyes, which are leading you to spiritual prostitution.
40 This will help you remember, and you will observe all my commandments and be holy to your God.
41 I am Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt in order to prove myself your God. I am Jehovah your God.’”
19 Jehovah spoke again to Moses and Aaron, saying:
2 “This is a statute of the law that Jehovah has commanded, ‘Tell the Israelites that they should take for you a sound red cow in which there is no defect and upon which no yoke has come.
3 You are to give it to El·e·aʹzar the priest, and he will lead it outside the camp, and it will be slaughtered before him.
4 Then El·e·aʹzar the priest will take some of its blood with his finger and spatter its blood seven times straight toward the front of the tent of meeting.
5 The cow will then be burned before his eyes. Its skin and its flesh and its blood together with its dung will be burned.
6 And the priest will take cedarwood, hyssop, and scarlet material and throw them into the fire where the cow is being burned.
7 The priest will then wash his garments and bathe himself in water, and afterward he may come into the camp; but the priest will be unclean until the evening.
8 “‘The one who burned the cow will wash his garments in water and bathe himself in water, and he will be unclean until the evening.
9 “‘A clean man will gather up the ashes of the cow and deposit them outside the camp in a clean place, and they should be kept by the assembly of the Israelites to prepare water that will be used for cleansing. It is a sin offering.
10 The one gathering the ashes of the cow will wash his garments and be unclean until the evening. “‘This will serve the Israelites and the foreigner who is residing in their midst as a lasting statute.
11 Anyone touching any dead person will be unclean for seven days.
12 Such one should purify himself with the water on the third day, and on the seventh day he will be clean. But if he does not purify himself on the third day, on the seventh day he will not be clean.
13 Everyone who touches the corpse of any dead person and does not purify himself has defiled Jehovah’s tabernacle, and that person must be cut off from Israel. Because the water for cleansing has not been sprinkled on him, he continues unclean. His uncleanness remains upon him.
14 “‘This is the law that applies when a man dies in a tent: Everyone who enters the tent and everyone who was already in the tent will be unclean for seven days.
15 Every opened container with no lid tied on it is unclean.
16 Everyone in the open field who touches someone killed with the sword or a corpse or the bone of a man or a burial place will be unclean for seven days.
17 They should take for the unclean one some of the ashes of the sin offering that was burned and pour running water on them in a container.
18 Then a clean man will take hyssop and dip it into the water and spatter it on the tent and on all the containers and on the people who were there and on the one who touched the bone or the slain one or the corpse or the burial place.
19 The clean person will spatter it on the unclean one on the third day and on the seventh day, and he will purify him from sin on the seventh day; then he should wash his garments and bathe in water, and he will become clean in the evening.
20 “‘But the man who is unclean and who will not purify himself, that person must be cut off from the congregation, because he has defiled Jehovah’s sanctuary. The water for cleansing was not sprinkled on him, so he is unclean.
21 “‘This will serve as a lasting statute for them: The one spattering the water for cleansing should wash his garments, and the one touching the water for cleansing will be unclean until the evening.
22 Anything the unclean one touches will be unclean, and the person who touches it will be unclean until the evening.’”
21 When the Caʹnaan·ite king of Aʹrad, who dwelled in the Negʹeb, heard that Israel had come by the way of Athʹa·rim, he attacked Israel and carried away some of them as captives.
2 So Israel made this vow to Jehovah: “If you give this people into my hand, I will without fail devote their cities to destruction.”
3 So Jehovah listened to Israel’s voice and gave the Caʹnaan·ites over to them, and they devoted them and their cities to destruction. Therefore, they named the place Horʹmah.
4 As they continued their journey from Mount Hor by the way of the Red Sea in order to go around the land of Eʹdom, the people became weary of the journey.
5 And the people kept speaking against God and Moses, saying: “Why have you brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness? There is no food and no water, and we have come to hate this contemptible bread.”
6 So Jehovah sent poisonous serpents among the people, and they kept biting the people, so that many Israelites died.
7 So the people came to Moses and said: “We have sinned by speaking against Jehovah and against you. Intercede with Jehovah so that he may remove the serpents from us.” And Moses interceded on behalf of the people.
8 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Make a replica of a poisonous snake and put it on a pole. Then when anyone has been bitten, he will have to look at it in order to keep alive.”
9 Moses at once made a serpent of copper and put it on the pole, and whenever a serpent had bitten a man and he looked at the copper serpent, he survived.
10 After that the Israelites departed and camped in Oʹboth.
11 Then they departed from Oʹboth and camped in Iʹye-abʹa·rim, in the wilderness that faces Moʹab, toward the east.
12 From there they departed and camped by the Valley of Zeʹred.
13 From there they departed and camped in the region of the Arʹnon, which is in the wilderness that extends from the border of the Amʹor·ites, for the Arʹnon is the boundary of Moʹab, between Moʹab and the Amʹor·ites.
14 That is why the book of the Wars of Jehovah speaks of “Vaʹheb in Suʹphah and the valleys of Arʹnon,
15 and the descent of the valleys, which extends toward the settlement of Ar and adjoins the border of Moʹab.”
16 Next they went on to Beʹer. This is the well about which Jehovah said to Moses: “Gather the people, and let me give them water.”
17 At that time, Israel sang this song: “Spring up, O well!—Respond to it!
18 The well that princes dug, that nobles of the people excavated, With a commander’s staff and with their own staffs.” Then they went from the wilderness on to Matʹta·nah,
19 from Matʹta·nah on to Na·halʹi·el, and from Na·halʹi·el on to Baʹmoth.
20 They went from Baʹmoth on to the valley that is in the territory of Moʹab, on top of Pisʹgah, which overlooks Je·shiʹmon.
21 Israel now sent messengers to Siʹhon, the king of the Amʹor·ites, saying:
22 “Let us pass through your land. We will not turn aside into a field or a vineyard. We will not drink water from any well. We will march on the King’s Road until we pass through your territory.”
23 But Siʹhon did not allow Israel to pass through his territory. Instead, Siʹhon gathered all his people and went out against Israel in the wilderness and came to Jaʹhaz and began fighting with Israel.
24 But Israel defeated him with the sword and took possession of his land from the Arʹnon to the Jabʹbok, near the Amʹmon·ites, because Jaʹzer borders the territory of the Amʹmon·ites.
25 So Israel took all these cities, and they began dwelling in all the cities of the Amʹor·ites, in Heshʹbon and all its dependent towns.
26 For Heshʹbon was the city of Siʹhon, the king of the Amʹor·ites, who had fought with the king of Moʹab and taken all his land from him as far as the Arʹnon.
27 That is what gave rise to the taunting proverbial saying: “Come to Heshʹbon. Let the city of Siʹhon be built and firmly established.
28 For a fire came out of Heshʹbon, a flame from the town of Siʹhon. It has consumed Ar of Moʹab, the lords of the high places of the Arʹnon.
29 Woe to you, Moʹab! You will be destroyed, O people of Cheʹmosh! He makes his sons fugitives and his daughters captives of Siʹhon, the king of the Amʹor·ites.
30 Let us shoot at them; Heshʹbon will be destroyed as far as Diʹbon; Let us desolate it as far as Noʹphah; Fire will spread as far as Medʹe·ba.”
31 So Israel began to dwell in the land of the Amʹor·ites.
32 Moses then sent some men to spy on Jaʹzer. They captured its dependent towns and drove out the Amʹor·ites who were there.
33 After that they turned and went up by way of Baʹshan. And Og the king of Baʹshan came out with all his people to meet them in battle at Edʹre·i.
34 Jehovah said to Moses: “Do not be afraid of him, for I will give him and all his people and his land into your hand, and you will do to him just as you did to Siʹhon the king of the Amʹor·ites, who lived in Heshʹbon.”
35 So they kept striking him down, along with his sons and all his people, until none of his people survived, and they took possession of his land.
22 Then the Israelites departed and camped on the desert plains of Moʹab across the Jordan from Jerʹi·cho.
2 Now Baʹlak the son of Zipʹpor saw all that Israel had done to the Amʹor·ites,
3 and Moʹab became very frightened of the people, because they were so many; indeed, Moʹab felt sick with fear because of the Israelites.
4 So Moʹab said to the elders of Midʹi·an: “Now this congregation will devour all our surroundings, just as a bull devours the grass in the field.” Baʹlak the son of Zipʹpor was king of Moʹab at that time.
5 He sent messengers to Baʹlaam the son of Beʹor at Peʹthor, which is by the River in his native land. He summoned him, saying: “Look! A people has come out of Egypt. Look! They have covered the face of the earth, and they are dwelling right in front of me.
6 Now, please, come and curse this people for me, for they are mightier than I am. Perhaps I can defeat them and drive them out of the land, for I well know that the one whom you bless is blessed and the one whom you curse is cursed.”
7 So the elders of Moʹab and the elders of Midʹi·an traveled with the fee for divination in their hands and went to Baʹlaam and conveyed to him Baʹlak’s message.
8 At that he said to them: “Spend the night here, and I will bring back to you whatever word Jehovah speaks to me.” So the princes of Moʹab stayed with Baʹlaam.
9 Then God came to Baʹlaam and said: “Who are these men with you?”
10 Baʹlaam said to the true God: “Baʹlak the son of Zipʹpor, the king of Moʹab, has sent me a message, saying,
11 ‘Look! The people who are coming out of Egypt are covering the face of the earth. Now come and put a curse on them for me. Perhaps I may be able to fight against them and drive them out.’”
12 But God said to Baʹlaam: “You must not go with them. You must not curse the people, for they are blessed.”
13 Baʹlaam got up in the morning and said to the princes of Baʹlak: “Go to your land, for Jehovah has refused to let me go with you.”
14 So the princes of Moʹab departed and returned to Baʹlak and said: “Baʹlaam has refused to come with us.”
15 However, Baʹlak again sent princes, more numerous and more distinguished than the first group.
16 They came to Baʹlaam and said to him: “This is what Baʹlak the son of Zipʹpor has said, ‘Please do not let anything hinder you from coming to me,
17 for I will honor you greatly and I will do anything you tell me to do. So come, please, and curse this people for me.’”
18 But Baʹlaam answered the servants of Baʹlak: “If Baʹlak were to give me his own house full of silver and gold, I could not do anything beyond the order of Jehovah my God, whether small or great.
19 But please stay here tonight also, so that I may learn what else Jehovah will tell me.”
20 Then God came to Baʹlaam by night and said to him: “If these men have come to summon you, go along with them. But you may speak only the words that I tell you to say.”
21 So Baʹlaam got up in the morning and saddled his donkey and went with the princes of Moʹab.
22 But God’s anger blazed because he was going, and Jehovah’s angel stationed himself in the road to resist him. Now Baʹlaam was riding on his donkey, and two of his attendants were with him.
23 And when the donkey saw Jehovah’s angel standing in the road with a drawn sword in his hand, it tried to turn off the road into the field. But Baʹlaam began to beat the donkey to make it return to the road.
24 Then Jehovah’s angel stood in a narrow path between two vineyards, with stone walls on both sides.
25 When the donkey saw Jehovah’s angel, it began to squeeze itself against the wall and it jammed Baʹlaam’s foot against the wall, and Baʹlaam began beating it again.
26 Jehovah’s angel now passed by again and stood in a narrow place where there was no way to turn to the right or to the left.
27 When the donkey saw Jehovah’s angel, it lay down under Baʹlaam, so Baʹlaam became furious and kept beating the donkey with his staff.
28 Finally Jehovah caused the donkey to speak, and it said to Baʹlaam: “What have I done to you to make you beat me these three times?”
29 Baʹlaam replied to the donkey: “It is because you have made a fool of me. If only I had a sword in my hand, I would kill you!”
30 Then the donkey said to Baʹlaam: “Am I not your donkey that you have ridden on all your life until today? Have I ever treated you this way before?” He replied: “No!”
31 Then Jehovah uncovered Baʹlaam’s eyes, and he saw Jehovah’s angel standing in the road with a drawn sword in his hand. At once he bowed low and prostrated himself on his face.
32 Then Jehovah’s angel said to him: “Why have you beaten your donkey these three times? Look! I myself came out to offer resistance, because your way is in defiance of my will.
33 The donkey saw me and tried to turn away from me these three times. Supposing it had not turned away from me! By now I would have killed you and let the donkey live.”
34 Baʹlaam said to Jehovah’s angel: “I have sinned, because I did not know that it was you standing in the road to meet me. And now if it is bad in your eyes, I will go back.”
35 But Jehovah’s angel said to Baʹlaam: “Go with the men, but you may speak only the words that I tell you.” So Baʹlaam continued going with the princes of Baʹlak.
36 When Baʹlak heard that Baʹlaam had come, he immediately went out to meet him at the city of Moʹab, which is on the bank of the Arʹnon on the border of the territory.
37 Baʹlak said to Baʹlaam: “Did I not send for you? Why did you not come to me? Did you think I am not able to honor you greatly?”
38 Baʹlaam replied to Baʹlak: “Well, I have come to you now. But will I be allowed to say anything? I can only speak words that God puts in my mouth.”
39 So Baʹlaam went with Baʹlak, and they came to Kirʹi·ath-huʹzoth.
40 Baʹlak sacrificed cattle and sheep and sent some to Baʹlaam and the princes who were with him.
41 In the morning Baʹlak took Baʹlaam and brought him up to Baʹmoth-baʹal; from there he could see all the people.
23 Then Baʹlaam said to Baʹlak: “Build on this spot seven altars, and prepare seven bulls and seven rams for me.”
2 Baʹlak immediately did just as Baʹlaam had said. And Baʹlak and Baʹlaam offered up a bull and a ram on each altar.
3 Baʹlaam then said to Baʹlak: “Stay here by your burnt offering, and I will go. Perhaps Jehovah will get in touch with me. Whatever he reveals to me, I will tell you.” So he went to a barren hill.
4 Then God got in touch with Baʹlaam, who said to Him: “I set the seven altars in rows, and I offered up a bull and a ram on each altar.”
5 Jehovah put this word in the mouth of Baʹlaam: “Return to Baʹlak, and this is what you are to say.”
6 So he returned and saw that Baʹlak and all the princes of Moʹab were standing by his burnt offering.
7 Then he spoke this proverbial saying: “Baʹlak the king of Moʹab has brought me from Aʹram, From the mountains of the east: ‘Do come to curse Jacob for me. Yes, come to denounce Israel.’
8 How could I put a curse on those whom God has not cursed? And how could I denounce those whom Jehovah has not denounced?
9 From the top of the rocks I see them, And from the hills I see them. As a people they dwell there alone; They do not count themselves among the nations.
10 Who can number the dust particles of Jacob Or count even the fourth part of Israel? Let me die the death of the upright, And let my end be like theirs.”
11 Baʹlak then said to Baʹlaam: “What have you done to me? I brought you to put a curse on my enemies, and here you have done nothing but bless them.”
12 He answered: “Must I not speak whatever Jehovah puts in my mouth?”
13 Baʹlak said to him: “Please come with me to another place from which you can see them. You will see only a part of them; you will not see them all. Put a curse on them for me from there.”
14 So he took him to the field of Zoʹphim, to the top of Pisʹgah, and built seven altars and offered up a bull and a ram on each altar.
15 So Baʹlaam said to Baʹlak: “Stay here by your burnt offering while I get in touch with Him over there.”
16 And Jehovah got in touch with Baʹlaam and put this word in his mouth: “Return to Baʹlak, and this is what you are to say.”
17 So he came to him and saw that he was waiting by his burnt offering, and the princes of Moʹab were with him. Baʹlak asked him: “What has Jehovah said?”
18 Then he spoke this proverbial saying: “Get up, Baʹlak, and listen. Hear me, O son of Zipʹpor.
19 God is not a mere man who tells lies, Nor a son of man who changes his mind. When he says something, will he not do it? When he speaks, will he not carry it out?
20 Look! I have been taken to bless; Now He has blessed, and I cannot reverse it.
21 He does not tolerate any magical power against Jacob, And he does not allow any trouble against Israel. Jehovah his God is with them, And he is loudly hailed as king among them.
22 God is bringing them out of Egypt. He is like the horns of a wild bull for them.
23 For there are no omens of doom against Jacob, Nor any divination against Israel. At this time it may be said about Jacob and Israel: ‘Look at what God has done!’
24 Here is a people who will rise up like a lion, And like the lion, it will raise itself up. It will not lie down until it eats prey And drinks the blood of the slain ones.”
25 Baʹlak then said to Baʹlaam: “If on the one hand you cannot put any curse on him, then on the other hand you should not bless him either.”
26 Baʹlaam answered Baʹlak: “Did I not say to you, ‘I will do all that Jehovah says’?”
27 Baʹlak said to Baʹlaam: “Please come and let me take you to yet another place. Perhaps it will be right in the eyes of the true God for you to put a curse on him for me from there.”
28 So Baʹlak took Baʹlaam to the top of Peʹor, which looks toward Je·shiʹmon.
29 Then Baʹlaam said to Baʹlak: “Build seven altars on this spot, and prepare seven bulls and seven rams for me.”
30 So Baʹlak did just as Baʹlaam had said, and he offered up a bull and a ram on each altar.
24 When Baʹlaam saw that it pleased Jehovah to bless Israel, he did not go away again to search for omens of doom, but he turned his face to the wilderness.
2 When Baʹlaam raised his eyes and saw Israel encamped by his tribes, then the spirit of God came upon him.
3 He then spoke this proverbial saying: “The saying of Baʹlaam the son of Beʹor, And the saying of a man whose eyes have been opened,
4 The saying of the one hearing the word of God, Who saw a vision of the Almighty, Who has bowed down with his eyes uncovered:
5 How beautiful are your tents, O Jacob, Your tabernacles, O Israel!
6 Like the valleys they have extended a long way, Like gardens by the river, Like aloes that Jehovah has planted, Like cedars by the waters.
7 Water keeps trickling from his two leather buckets, And his seed is sown by many waters. His king also will be greater than Aʹgag, And his kingdom will be exalted.
8 God is bringing him out of Egypt; He is like the horns of a wild bull for them. He will consume the nations, his oppressors, And their bones he will gnaw, and he will shatter them with his arrows.
9 He has crouched down, he has lain down like the lion, And like a lion, who dares rouse him? Those blessing you are blessed, And those cursing you are cursed.”
10 Then Baʹlak became furious with Baʹlaam. Baʹlak scornfully clapped his hands together and said to Baʹlaam: “It was to put a curse on my enemies that I called you, but now you have done nothing but bless them these three times.
11 Now go home immediately. I intended to honor you greatly, but look! Jehovah has deprived you of honor.”
12 Baʹlaam replied to Baʹlak: “Did I not say to the messengers you sent,
13 ‘If Baʹlak were to give me his house full of silver and gold, I could not of my own will do anything beyond the order of Jehovah, whether good or bad. I will only speak what Jehovah will tell me’?
14 And now I am going away to my people. Come and let me advise you what this people will do to your people in the future.”
15 So he spoke this proverbial saying: “The saying of Baʹlaam the son of Beʹor, And the saying of a man whose eyes have been opened,
16 The saying of the one hearing the word of God, And the one having the knowledge of the Most High, A vision of the Almighty he saw While bowing down with his eyes uncovered:
17 I will see him, but not now; I will behold him, but not soon. A star will come out of Jacob, And a scepter will rise out of Israel. And he will certainly break apart the forehead of Moʹab And the skull of all the sons of tumult.
18 And Eʹdom will become a possession, Yes, Seʹir the possession of his enemies, While Israel is displaying his courage.
19 And out of Jacob one will be subduing, And he will destroy any survivor from the city.”
20 When he saw Amʹa·lek, he continued his proverbial saying: “Amʹa·lek was the first of the nations, But in the end he will perish.”
21 When he saw the Kenʹites, he continued his proverbial saying: “Secure is your dwelling, and set on the crag is your abode.
22 But someone will burn Kaʹin down. How long before As·syrʹi·a carries you away captive?”
23 And he continued his proverbial saying: “Woe! Who will survive when God does this?
24 Ships will come from the coast of Kitʹtim, And they will afflict As·syrʹi·a, And they will afflict Eʹber. But he too will utterly perish.”
25 Then Baʹlaam got up and went and returned to his place. Baʹlak also went his own way.
25 When Israel was dwelling in Shitʹtim, the people started to commit sexual immorality with the daughters of Moʹab.
2 The women invited the people to the sacrifices of their gods, and the people began to eat and to bow down to their gods.
3 So Israel joined in worship of the Baʹal of Peʹor, and Jehovah became enraged with Israel.
4 Jehovah said to Moses: “Take all the leaders of these people and hang them up before Jehovah in broad daylight, that the burning anger of Jehovah may turn back from Israel.”
5 Then Moses said to the judges of Israel: “Each one of you should kill his men who joined in worship of the Baʹal of Peʹor.”
6 But just then, there came one of the Israelites bringing near to his brothers a Midʹi·an·ite woman before the eyes of Moses and of all the assembly of the Israelites, while they were weeping at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
7 When Phinʹe·has the son of El·e·aʹzar the son of Aaron the priest saw it, he immediately rose up from the midst of the assembly and took a spear in his hand.
8 Then he went after the man of Israel into the tent and pierced both of them through, the man of Israel and the woman through her genital parts. At that the scourge on the Israelites was halted.
9 Those who died from the scourge amounted to 24,000.
10 Then Jehovah said to Moses:
11 “Phinʹe·has the son of El·e·aʹzar the son of Aaron the priest has turned my wrath away from the people of Israel because he tolerated no rivalry at all toward me among them. So I have not exterminated the Israelites in my insistence on exclusive devotion.
12 Therefore, say, ‘I am giving him my covenant of peace.
13 And it will serve as the covenant of a lasting priesthood for him and his offspring after him, because he tolerated no rivalry toward his God and he made atonement for the people of Israel.’”
14 Incidentally, the name of the Israelite man who was put to death along with the Midʹi·an·i·tess was Zimʹri the son of Saʹlu, a chieftain of a paternal house of the Simʹe·on·ites.
15 The name of the Midʹi·an·ite woman who was put to death was Cozʹbi the daughter of Zur; he was a leader of the clans of a paternal house in Midʹi·an.
16 Jehovah later said to Moses:
17 “Harass the Midʹi·an·ites and strike them down,
18 because they have been harassing you with their cunning dealings against you in the affair of Peʹor and of Cozʹbi the daughter of a chieftain of Midʹi·an, their sister who was put to death in the day of the scourge over the affair of Peʹor.”
27 Then the daughters of Ze·loʹphe·had, the son of Heʹpher, the son of Gilʹe·ad, the son of Maʹchir, the son of Ma·nasʹseh, of the families of Ma·nasʹseh the son of Joseph, approached. The names of his daughters were Mahʹlah, Noah, Hogʹlah, Milʹcah, and Tirʹzah.
2 They stood before Moses, El·e·aʹzar the priest, the chieftains, and all the assembly at the entrance of the tent of meeting and said:
3 “Our father died in the wilderness, but he was not among the group who banded together against Jehovah, the supporters of Korʹah, but he died for his own sin and he did not have any sons.
4 Why should the name of our father be lost from his family because he had no son? Give us a possession among our father’s brothers.”
5 So Moses presented their case before Jehovah.
6 Jehovah then said this to Moses:
7 “The daughters of Ze·loʹphe·had are correct. You should by all means give them the possession as an inheritance among their father’s brothers and transfer their father’s inheritance to them.
8 And tell the Israelites, ‘If a man dies without having a son, you must then cause his inheritance to pass to his daughter.
9 And if he has no daughter, you will give his inheritance to his brothers.
10 And if he has no brothers, you will give his inheritance to his father’s brothers.
11 And if his father has no brothers, you will give his inheritance to the closest blood relative in his family, and he will take possession of it. This will serve as a statute by judicial decision for the Israelites, just as Jehovah has commanded Moses.’”
12 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Go up into this mountain of Abʹa·rim, and view the land that I will give the Israelites.
13 When you have seen it, you will also be gathered to your people, just as Aaron your brother was,
14 because when the assembly was quarreling with me in the wilderness of Zin, you rebelled against my order to sanctify me before them by means of the waters. These are the waters of Merʹi·bah at Kaʹdesh in the wilderness of Zin.”
15 Then Moses said to Jehovah:
16 “Let Jehovah, the God of the spirit of all people, appoint over the assembly a man
17 who will go out and come in before them and who will lead them out and bring them in, so that Jehovah’s assembly may not become like sheep that have no shepherd.”
18 So Jehovah said to Moses: “Take Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom there is spirit, and lay your hand on him.
19 Then stand him before El·e·aʹzar the priest and before all the assembly, and you must commission him before their eyes.
20 You are to confer some of your authority on him, so that all the assembly of the Israelites may listen to him.
21 He will stand before El·e·aʹzar the priest, who will inquire in his behalf by the judgment of the Uʹrim before Jehovah. At his order they will go out and at his order they will come in, he and all the Israelites with him and all the assembly.”
22 So Moses did just as Jehovah had commanded him. He took Joshua and stood him before El·e·aʹzar the priest and before all the assembly,
23 and he laid his hands on him and commissioned him, just as Jehovah had spoken through Moses.
28 Jehovah next said to Moses:
2 “Command the Israelites and tell them, ‘You should take care that you present to me my offering, my bread. My offerings by fire as a pleasing aroma to me must be made at their appointed times.’
3 “And say to them, ‘This is the offering made by fire that you will present to Jehovah: two sound year-old male lambs a day as a burnt offering regularly.
4 The one male lamb you will offer in the morning, and the other male lamb you will offer at twilight,
5 together with a tenth of an eʹphah of fine flour mixed with a fourth of a hin of beaten oil as a grain offering.
6 It is a regular burnt offering, which was established at Mount Siʹnai as a pleasing aroma, an offering made by fire to Jehovah,
7 along with its drink offering, a fourth of a hin for each male lamb. Pour out the alcoholic drink in the holy place as a drink offering to Jehovah.
8 And you will offer the other male lamb at twilight. With the same grain offering as that made in the morning and with its same drink offering, you will present it as an offering made by fire as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
9 “‘However, on the Sabbath day, the offering should be two sound year-old male lambs and two tenths of an eʹphah measure of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering, together with its drink offering.
10 This is the burnt offering for the Sabbath, along with the regular burnt offering and its drink offering.
11 “‘At the start of each month you will present as a burnt offering to Jehovah two young bulls, one ram, and seven sound male lambs each a year old,
12 and three tenth measures of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering for each bull and two tenth measures of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering for the one ram,
13 and a tenth measure of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering for each male lamb, as a burnt offering, a pleasing aroma, an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
14 And their drink offerings should be half a hin of wine for a bull and a third of a hin for the ram and a fourth of a hin for a male lamb. This is the monthly burnt offering each month throughout the year.
15 Also, one young goat should be offered as a sin offering to Jehovah in addition to the regular burnt offering together with its drink offering.
16 “‘In the first month, on the 14th day of the month, will be Jehovah’s Passover.
17 And on the 15th day of this month, there will be a festival. Unleavened bread will be eaten for seven days.
18 On the first day there will be a holy convention. You must not do any hard work.
19 And you will present as a burnt offering made by fire to Jehovah two young bulls, one ram, and seven male lambs each a year old. You should offer sound animals.
20 You should offer them with their grain offerings of fine flour mixed with oil, three tenth measures for a bull and two tenth measures for the ram.
21 You will offer a tenth measure respectively for each male lamb of the seven male lambs,
22 as well as one goat as a sin offering to make atonement for you.
23 Aside from the morning burnt offering, which is for the regular burnt offering, you will offer these.
24 You will offer these in the same manner each day for seven days as food, an offering made by fire as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah. It should be offered along with the regular burnt offering and its drink offering.
25 On the seventh day you should hold a holy convention. You must not do any hard work.
26 “‘On the day of the first ripe fruits, when you present a new grain offering to Jehovah, you should hold a holy convention in your feast of weeks. You must not do any hard work.
27 You will present as a burnt offering for a pleasing aroma to Jehovah two young bulls, one ram, and seven male lambs each a year old,
28 and as their grain offering of fine flour mixed with oil, three tenth measures for each bull, two tenth measures for the one ram,
29 a tenth measure respectively for each male lamb of the seven male lambs,
30 as well as one young goat to make atonement for you.
31 You will offer them in addition to the regular burnt offering and its grain offering. They should be sound animals, along with their drink offerings.
30 Then Moses spoke to the heads of the tribes of Israel, saying: “This is the word that Jehovah has commanded:
2 If a man makes a vow to Jehovah or swears an oath to impose on himself a vow of abstinence, he must not violate his word. He should do everything he vowed he would do.
3 “And if a woman makes a vow to Jehovah or she imposes a vow of abstinence on herself when she is young and living in the house of her father
4 and her father hears her vow or her abstinence vow that she has imposed on herself and her father offers no objection, all her vows will stand, and every abstinence vow that she has imposed on herself will stand.
5 But if her father forbids her when he hears that she has imposed vows or abstinence vows on herself, it will not stand. Jehovah will forgive her because her father forbade her.
6 “However, if she should marry a husband while under her vow or the rash promise that she has imposed on herself
7 and her husband hears of it and offers no objection on the day he hears of it, her vows or her abstinence vows that she has imposed on herself will stand.
8 But if her husband forbids her on the day he hears of it, he may annul the vow or the rash promise that she imposed on herself, and Jehovah will forgive her.
9 “But if a widow or a divorced woman makes a vow, everything that she has imposed on herself will be binding on her.
10 “However, if a woman imposed the vow or the abstinence vow on herself while in the house of her husband
11 and her husband heard it and has not objected or disapproved, all her vows or any abstinence vow that she imposed on herself will stand.
12 But if on the day he heard them her husband completely annulled whatever vows or abstinence vow she swore to, they will not stand. Her husband annulled them, and Jehovah will forgive her.
13 Regarding any vow or any oath involving an abstinence vow to practice self-denial, her husband should establish it or her husband should annul it.
14 But if her husband offers no objection at all from day to day, he also establishes all her vows or all her abstinence vows that are upon her. He establishes them because he did not object on the day he heard her make them.
15 But if he annuls them later, sometime after the day he heard them, he will bear the consequences of her guilt.
16 “These are the regulations that Jehovah commanded Moses relating to a husband and his wife, and relating to a father and his young daughter living in his house.”
34 And Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying:
2 “Give these instructions to the Israelites: ‘When you go into the land of Caʹnaan, this is the land that will fall to you as an inheritance, the land of Caʹnaan according to its boundaries.
3 “‘Your southern border will extend from the wilderness of Zin alongside Eʹdom, and your south boundary on the east will be from the extremity of the Salt Sea.
4 Your boundary will change direction to pass south of the ascent of A·krabʹbim and continue to Zin, and its end will be south of Kaʹdesh-barʹne·a. Then it will extend to Haʹzar-adʹdar and continue to Azʹmon.
5 The boundary will change direction at Azʹmon to the Wadi of Egypt, and its end will be at the Sea.
6 “‘Your western boundary will be the Great Sea and the coast. This will become your western boundary.
7 “‘Now this will be your northern boundary: From the Great Sea you will mark your boundary out to Mount Hor.
8 From Mount Hor you will mark out the boundary to Leʹbo-haʹmath, and the end of the boundary will be at Zeʹdad.
9 And the boundary will extend to Ziphʹron, and its end will be Haʹzar-eʹnan. This will become your northern boundary.
10 “‘Then you should mark as your boundary on the east from Haʹzar-eʹnan to Sheʹpham.
11 The boundary will extend from Sheʹpham to Ribʹlah to the east of Aʹin, and the border will go down and cross the eastern slope of the Sea of Chinʹne·reth.
12 The border will extend to the Jordan, and its end will be the Salt Sea. This will be your land and the boundaries surrounding it.’”
13 So Moses instructed the Israelites, saying: “This is the land that you will apportion as your possession by lot, just as Jehovah has commanded to give to the nine and a half tribes.
14 For the tribe of the Reuʹben·ites by their paternal house, the tribe of the Gadʹites by their paternal house, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh have already taken their inheritance.
15 The two and a half tribes have already taken their inheritance east of the region of the Jordan by Jerʹi·cho, toward the sunrising.”
16 Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying:
17 “These are the names of the men who will divide the land for you to possess: El·e·aʹzar the priest and Joshua the son of Nun.
18 And you will take one chieftain out of each tribe to divide the land as your inheritance.
19 These are the names of the men: of the tribe of Judah, Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh;
20 of the tribe of the sons of Simʹe·on, She·muʹel the son of Am·miʹhud;
21 of the tribe of Benjamin, E·liʹdad the son of Chisʹlon;
22 of the tribe of the sons of Dan, a chieftain, Bukʹki the son of Jogʹli;
23 of the sons of Joseph from the tribe of the sons of Ma·nasʹseh, a chieftain, Hanʹni·el the son of Eʹphod;
24 from the tribe of the sons of Eʹphra·im, a chieftain, Kem·uʹel the son of Shiphʹtan;
25 of the tribe of the sons of Zebʹu·lun, a chieftain, E·li·zaʹphan the son of Parʹnach;
26 of the tribe of the sons of Isʹsa·char, a chieftain, Palʹti·el the son of Azʹzan;
27 of the tribe of the sons of Ashʹer, a chieftain, A·hiʹhud the son of She·loʹmi;
28 of the tribe of the sons of Naphʹta·li, a chieftain, Ped·ahʹel the son of Am·miʹhud.”
29 These are the ones whom Jehovah commanded to distribute the land to the Israelites in the land of Caʹnaan.
36 The family heads of the descendants of Gilʹe·ad the son of Maʹchir the son of Ma·nasʹseh of the families of the sons of Joseph approached and spoke before Moses and the chieftains, the family heads of the Israelites.
2 They said: “Jehovah commanded my lord to distribute the land by lot as an inheritance to the Israelites; and my lord was commanded by Jehovah to give the inheritance of our brother Ze·loʹphe·had to his daughters.
3 If they marry men from another Israelite tribe, the women’s inheritance will also be withdrawn from the inheritance of our fathers and be added to the inheritance of the tribe to which they would then belong, so that it would be withdrawn from the lot of our inheritance.
4 Now when the Jubilee takes place for the people of Israel, the women’s inheritance will also be added to the inheritance of the tribe to which they then belong, so that their inheritance would be withdrawn from the inheritance of the tribe of our fathers.”
5 Then Moses commanded the Israelites at the order of Jehovah: “What the tribe of the sons of Joseph is saying is correct.
6 This is the word that Jehovah has commanded for the daughters of Ze·loʹphe·had: ‘They may marry whomever they wish. However, they should marry someone from a family of the tribe of their father.
7 No inheritance of the Israelites should circulate from tribe to tribe, for the Israelites should hold on to the inheritance of the tribe of their forefathers.
8 And every daughter who possesses an inheritance among the tribes of Israel should become a wife of a descendant of her father’s tribe, so that the Israelites may keep possession of the inheritance of their forefathers.
9 No inheritance should circulate from one tribe to another tribe, for the tribes of Israel should hold on to their own inheritance.’”
10 The daughters of Ze·loʹphe·had did just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
11 So Mahʹlah, Tirʹzah, Hogʹlah, Milʹcah, and Noah, the daughters of Ze·loʹphe·had, married the sons of their father’s brothers.
12 They became wives of men from the families of Ma·nasʹseh the son of Joseph so that their inheritance would remain in the tribe of their father’s family.
13 These are the commandments and the judicial decisions that Jehovah gave to the Israelites through Moses on the desert plains of Moʹab by the Jordan at Jerʹi·cho.
4 “Now, O Israel, listen to the regulations and the judicial decisions that I am teaching you to observe, so that you may live and go in and take possession of the land that Jehovah, the God of your forefathers, is giving you.
2 You must not add to the word that I am commanding you, neither must you take away from it, so as to keep the commandments of Jehovah your God that I am commanding you.
3 “Your own eyes have seen what Jehovah did in the case of the Baʹal of Peʹor; Jehovah your God annihilated from your midst every man who walked after the Baʹal of Peʹor.
4 But you who are holding fast to Jehovah your God are all alive today.
5 See, I have taught you regulations and judicial decisions, just as Jehovah my God has commanded me, so that you may observe them in the land you will take possession of.
6 You must carefully follow them, because this will show wisdom and understanding on your part before the peoples who will hear about all these regulations, and they will say, ‘This great nation is undoubtedly a wise and understanding people.’
7 For what great nation has gods as near to it as Jehovah our God is to us whenever we call on him?
8 And what great nation has righteous regulations and judicial decisions like this entire Law that I am putting before you today?
9 “Just be careful and watch yourself closely, so that you may not forget the things that your eyes have seen and so that they may not depart from your heart all the days of your life. You must also make them known to your sons and to your grandsons.
10 On the day that you stood before Jehovah your God in Hoʹreb, Jehovah said to me, ‘Congregate the people together to me so that I may let them hear my words, in order that they may learn to fear me all the days that they are alive on the ground and that they may teach their sons.’
11 “So you came near and stood at the base of the mountain, and the mountain was burning with fire up to the very heavens; there was darkness, cloud, and thick gloom.
12 And Jehovah began to speak to you out of the fire. You heard the sound of words, but you saw no form—there was only a voice.
13 And he declared his covenant to you, which he commanded you to observe—the Ten Commandments. Afterward, he wrote them on two tablets of stone.
14 At that time Jehovah commanded me to teach you regulations and judicial decisions, which you are to observe in the land you will enter to take possession of.
15 “Therefore, watch yourselves closely—since you did not see any form on the day Jehovah spoke to you in Hoʹreb out of the middle of the fire—
16 that you may not act corruptly by making for yourselves any carved image having the form of any symbol, the representation of male or female,
17 the representation of any animal on the earth or the representation of any bird that flies in the sky,
18 the representation of anything creeping on the ground or the representation of any fish in the waters under the earth.
19 And when you raise your eyes to the heavens and see the sun and the moon and the stars—all the army of the heavens—do not get seduced and bow down to them and serve them. Jehovah your God has given them to all the peoples under the whole heavens.
20 But you are the ones Jehovah took and brought out of the iron-smelting furnace, out of Egypt, to become the people of his personal possession, as you are today.
21 “Jehovah became angry with me because of you, and he swore that I should not cross the Jordan or go into the good land that Jehovah your God is giving you as an inheritance.
22 For I am to die in this land; I will not cross the Jordan, but you will cross over and take possession of this good land.
23 Be careful that you do not forget the covenant of Jehovah your God that he made with you, and do not make for yourselves a carved image, the form of anything forbidden to you by Jehovah your God.
24 For Jehovah your God is a consuming fire, a God who requires exclusive devotion.
25 “If you become father to sons and grandsons and you have lived a long time in the land and you act ruinously and make a carved image of any kind and you do what is evil in the eyes of Jehovah your God so as to offend him,
26 I do take the heavens and the earth as witnesses against you today that you will surely and quickly perish from the land that you are crossing the Jordan to take possession of. You will not last long on it, but you will be utterly annihilated.
27 Jehovah will scatter you among the peoples, and just a few of you will survive among the nations to which Jehovah will have driven you.
28 There you will have to serve gods of wood and stone made by human hands, gods that cannot see or hear or eat or smell.
29 “If you search for Jehovah your God from there, you will certainly find him, if you inquire for him with all your heart and with all your soul.
30 When you are in great distress and all these things have happened to you in later times, then you will return to Jehovah your God and listen to his voice.
31 For Jehovah your God is a merciful God. He will not desert you or bring you to ruin or forget the covenant that he swore to your forefathers.
32 “Ask, now, about the former days before your time, from the day when God created man on the earth; search from one end of the heavens to the other end of the heavens. Has anything so great ever happened or has anything like it ever been heard of?
33 Have any other people heard the voice of God speaking out of the fire the way you have heard it and kept on living?
34 Or has God ever attempted to take for himself a nation out of the midst of another nation along with judgments, with signs, with miracles, with war, with a mighty hand, with an outstretched arm, and with terrifying deeds, as Jehovah your God did for you in Egypt before your very eyes?
35 You yourselves have been shown these things so you will know that Jehovah is the true God; there is no other besides him.
36 He made you hear his voice from the heavens to correct you, and on the earth he made you see his great fire, and his words you heard from out of the fire.
37 “Because he loved your forefathers and has chosen their offspring after them, you were brought out of Egypt in his presence by his great power.
38 From before you he drove away nations greater and mightier than you, to bring you in and give you their land as an inheritance, as it is today.
39 Know, therefore, on this day, and take it to heart that Jehovah is the true God in the heavens above and on the earth beneath. There is no other.
40 You must keep his regulations and his commandments that I am commanding you today, in order that it may go well with you and your sons after you, so that you may long remain in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you.”
41 At that time Moses set apart three cities on the eastern side of the Jordan.
42 If any manslayer unintentionally kills his fellow man and he did not previously hate him, he must flee to one of these cities and live.
43 The cities are Beʹzer in the wilderness on the tableland for the Reuʹben·ites, Raʹmoth in Gilʹe·ad for the Gadʹites, and Goʹlan in Baʹshan for the Ma·nasʹsites.
44 Now this is the Law that Moses set before the people of Israel.
45 These are the reminders, the regulations, and the judicial decisions that Moses gave to the Israelites after they came out of Egypt,
46 in the region of the Jordan, in the valley opposite Beth-peʹor, in the land of King Siʹhon of the Amʹor·ites, who was dwelling in Heshʹbon, whom Moses and the Israelites defeated after coming out of Egypt.
47 And they took possession of his land and of the land of King Og of Baʹshan, the two kings of the Amʹor·ites who were in the region east of the Jordan,
48 from A·roʹer, which is on the rim of the Arʹnon Valley, up to Mount Siʹon, that is, Herʹmon,
49 and all the Arʹa·bah in the region east of the Jordan, and as far as the Sea of the Arʹa·bah, at the base of the slopes of Pisʹgah.
5 Moses then summoned all Israel and said to them: “Hear, O Israel, the regulations and the judicial decisions that I am announcing to you today, and you must learn them and carefully observe them.
2 Jehovah our God made a covenant with us in Hoʹreb.
3 It was not with our forefathers that Jehovah made this covenant, but with us, all of us alive here today.
4 Jehovah spoke face-to-face with you in the mountain, out of the fire.
5 I was standing between Jehovah and you at that time to convey to you the word of Jehovah, for you were afraid because of the fire and did not go up the mountain. He said:
6 “‘I am Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery.
7 You must never have any other gods besides me.
8 “‘You must not make for yourself a carved image or a form like anything that is in the heavens above or on the earth below or in the waters under the earth.
9 You must not bow down to them nor be led to serve them, for I, Jehovah your God, am a God who requires exclusive devotion, bringing punishment for the error of fathers upon sons, upon the third generation and upon the fourth generation of those who hate me,
10 but showing loyal love to the thousandth generation of those who love me and keep my commandments.
11 “‘You must not take up the name of Jehovah your God in a worthless way, for Jehovah will not leave anyone unpunished who takes up his name in a worthless way.
12 “‘Observe the Sabbath day to keep it sacred, just as Jehovah your God commanded you.
13 You are to labor and do all your work in six days,
14 but the seventh day is a sabbath to Jehovah your God. You must not do any work, neither you nor your son nor your daughter nor your slave man nor your slave girl nor your bull nor your donkey nor any of your domestic animals nor your foreign resident who is inside your cities, in order that your slave man and your slave girl may rest the same as you.
15 Remember that you became a slave in the land of Egypt and that Jehovah your God brought you out of there with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm. That is why Jehovah your God commanded you to observe the Sabbath day.
16 “‘Honor your father and your mother, just as Jehovah your God has commanded you, so that you may live a long time and you may prosper in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you.
17 “‘You must not murder.
18 “‘Neither must you commit adultery.
19 “‘Neither must you steal.
20 “‘Neither must you testify to a falsehood against your fellow man.
21 “‘Neither must you desire your fellow man’s wife. Neither must you selfishly desire your fellow man’s house nor his field nor his slave man nor his slave girl nor his bull nor his donkey nor anything that belongs to your fellow man.’
22 “These commandments Jehovah spoke to all your congregation on the mountain, out of the fire, the cloud, and the thick gloom, with a loud voice, and he added nothing further; then he wrote them on two tablets of stone and gave them to me.
23 “But as soon as you had heard the voice out of the darkness, while the mountain was burning with fire, all the heads of your tribes and the elders approached me.
24 Then you said, ‘Here Jehovah our God has shown us his glory and his greatness, and we have heard his voice out of the fire. Today we have seen that God can speak with man and he can keep living.
25 Now, why should we die? For this great fire may consume us. If we continue hearing the voice of Jehovah our God, we are sure to die.
26 For who is there of all flesh who has heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the fire as we did and yet goes on living?
27 You yourself must go near to hear all that Jehovah our God will say, and you will be the one to tell us all that Jehovah our God says to you, and we will listen and do it.’
28 “So Jehovah heard the words you spoke to me, and Jehovah said to me, ‘I have heard the words that this people have spoken to you. All they have said is good.
29 If only they would always have a heart inclined to fear me and to keep all my commandments; then it would go well with them and their sons forever!
30 Go say to them: “Return to your tents.”
31 But you should stay here with me, and let me tell you all the commandments, the regulations, and the judicial decisions that you should teach to them and that they are to observe in the land that I am giving them to take possession of.’
32 Now you people should be careful to do just as Jehovah your God has commanded you. You must not turn to the right or to the left.
33 You should walk in all the way that Jehovah your God has commanded you, in order that you may live and prosper and prolong your days in the land that you will take possession of.
6 “Now these are the commandments, the regulations, and the judicial decisions that Jehovah your God has given to teach you, so that you may observe them when you cross over into the land that you are to take possession of,
2 in order that you may fear Jehovah your God and keep all his statutes and his commandments that I am commanding you—you and your son and your grandson—all the days of your life, so that you may live a long time.
3 And you must listen, O Israel, and carefully observe them, so that you may prosper and become very many in the land flowing with milk and honey, just as Jehovah, the God of your forefathers, has promised you.
4 “Listen, O Israel: Jehovah our God is one Jehovah.
5 You must love Jehovah your God with all your heart and all your soul and all your strength.
6 These words that I am commanding you today must be on your heart,
7 and you must inculcate them in your sons and speak of them when you sit in your house and when you walk on the road and when you lie down and when you get up.
8 Tie them as a reminder on your hand, and they must be like a headband on your forehead.
9 Write them on the doorposts of your house and on your gates.
10 “When Jehovah your God brings you into the land that he swore to your forefathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob to give you—great and fine cities that you did not build,
11 houses full of all sorts of good things that you did not work for, hewn cisterns that you did not dig, and vineyards and olive trees that you did not plant—and you have eaten and become satisfied,
12 be careful not to forget Jehovah, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery.
13 Jehovah your God you should fear, and him you should serve, and by his name you should swear.
14 You must not follow after other gods, any gods of the peoples who are all around you,
15 for Jehovah your God who is in your midst is a God who requires exclusive devotion. Otherwise, the anger of Jehovah your God will blaze against you and he will annihilate you from the face of the earth.
16 “You must not put Jehovah your God to the test the way you put him to the test at Masʹsah.
17 You should diligently observe the commandments of Jehovah your God and his reminders and his regulations that he has commanded you to observe.
18 You must do what is right and good in Jehovah’s eyes, in order that you may prosper and that you may enter and take possession of the good land about which Jehovah has sworn to your forefathers,
19 by driving out all your enemies from before you, just as Jehovah has promised.
20 “In the future, when your son asks you, ‘What is the meaning of the reminders, the regulations, and the judicial decisions that Jehovah our God has commanded you?’
21 then you will say to your son, ‘We became slaves to Pharʹaoh in Egypt, but Jehovah brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand.
22 So before our eyes Jehovah kept sending signs and miracles, great and devastating, upon Egypt, upon Pharʹaoh, and upon all his household.
23 And he brought us out from there in order to bring us here to give us the land about which he had sworn to our forefathers.
24 Then Jehovah commanded us to carry out all these regulations and to fear Jehovah our God for our lasting good, so that we could keep alive, as we are today.
25 And it will mean righteousness for us if we are careful to observe all these commandments in obedience to Jehovah our God, just as he has commanded us.’
7 “When Jehovah your God brings you into the land you are about to enter and take possession of, he will also clear away populous nations from before you: the Hitʹtites, the Girʹga·shites, the Amʹor·ites, the Caʹnaan·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites, seven nations more populous and mightier than you are.
2 Jehovah your God will give them over to you, and you will defeat them. You should without fail devote them to destruction. You must not make any covenant with them nor show them any favor.
3 You must not form any marriage alliances with them. Do not give your daughters to their sons or take their daughters for your sons.
4 For they will turn your sons away from following me to serve other gods; then Jehovah’s anger will blaze against you, and he will swiftly annihilate you.
5 “Instead, this is what you should do to them: Tear down their altars, break up their sacred pillars, cut down their sacred poles, and burn up their graven images.
6 For you are a holy people to Jehovah your God, and Jehovah your God has chosen you to become his people, his special property, out of all the peoples who are on the face of the earth.
7 “It was not because you were the most numerous of all the peoples that Jehovah showed affection for you and chose you, for you were the smallest of all the peoples.
8 Rather, it was because of Jehovah’s love for you and because he kept the oath that he had sworn to your forefathers that Jehovah brought you out with a mighty hand, to redeem you from the house of slavery, from the power of Pharʹaoh king of Egypt.
9 You well know that Jehovah your God is the true God, the faithful God, keeping his covenant and loyal love to a thousand generations of those who love him and keep his commandments.
10 But those who hate him he will repay to their face with destruction. He will not be slow to deal with those who hate him; he will repay them to their face.
11 Therefore, take care to keep the commandments and the regulations and the judicial decisions that I am commanding you today, by observing them.
12 “If you continue listening to these judicial decisions and you observe them and carry them out, Jehovah your God will keep the covenant and the loyal love about which he swore to your forefathers.
13 He will love you and bless you and multiply you. Yes, he will bless you with many children and with the produce of your soil, your grain, your new wine, your oil, the calves of your herds and the lambs of your flocks, in the land that he swore to your forefathers to give to you.
14 You will become the most blessed of all the peoples; no man or woman among you will be childless, nor will your livestock be without young.
15 Jehovah will take away from you all sickness, and he will not bring upon you any of the terrible diseases that you have known in Egypt. Instead, he will bring them upon all those who hate you.
16 You are to destroy all the peoples whom Jehovah your God gives over to you. You must not feel sorry for them, and you must not serve their gods, because that would be a snare to you.
17 “If you should say in your heart, ‘These nations outnumber us. How can I drive them away?’
18 you must not be afraid of them. You should remind yourself of what Jehovah your God did to Pharʹaoh and all Egypt,
19 the great judgments that your eyes saw and the signs and the miracles and the mighty hand and the outstretched arm with which Jehovah your God brought you out. That is what Jehovah your God will do to all the peoples you fear.
20 Jehovah your God will send the feeling of dejection upon them until those who were left remaining and who were concealing themselves from before you perish.
21 Do not be struck with terror because of them, for Jehovah your God is with you, a great and awe-inspiring God.
22 “Jehovah your God will certainly drive these nations away from before you little by little. You will not be allowed to put an end to them quickly, so that the wild animals of the field will not multiply against you.
23 Jehovah your God will give them over to you and utterly defeat them until they are annihilated.
24 He will give their kings into your hand, and you will wipe out their names from under the heavens. Nobody will stand up to you, until you have exterminated them.
25 You should burn the graven images of their gods in the fire. Do not desire the silver and the gold on them or take it for yourself, so that you are not ensnared by it, for it is something detestable to Jehovah your God.
26 You must not bring a detestable thing into your house and thereby become something devoted to destruction like it. You should utterly loathe it and absolutely detest it, because it is something devoted to destruction.
11 “You must love Jehovah your God and always keep your obligation to him and his statutes, his judicial decisions, and his commandments.
2 You know that today I am addressing you, not your sons who have not known or seen the discipline of Jehovah your God, his greatness, his mighty hand and his outstretched arm.
3 They did not see his signs and his deeds that he did in Egypt to Pharʹaoh king of Egypt and to all his land;
4 or what he did to the armies of Egypt, to Pharʹaoh’s horses and war chariots, which were overwhelmed by the waters of the Red Sea when they were chasing after you, and Jehovah destroyed them once and for all.
5 They did not see what he has done for you in the wilderness until your coming to this place,
6 or what he did to Daʹthan and A·biʹram, the sons of E·liʹab the son of Reuʹben, when the earth opened and swallowed them up, along with their households and their tents and every living thing that followed them, before the eyes of all Israel.
7 Your own eyes have seen all the great deeds that Jehovah did.
8 “You must keep the whole commandment that I am giving you today, so that you may grow strong and cross over into the land to take possession of it,
9 and so that you may live long in the land that Jehovah swore to give to your forefathers and their offspring, a land flowing with milk and honey.
10 “The land you are going to take possession of is not like the land of Egypt, out of which you came, where you used to sow your seed and irrigate it with your foot, like a garden of vegetables.
11 But the land you are about to cross into and possess is a land of mountains and valley plains. It drinks the water that rains from the heavens;
12 it is a land that Jehovah your God is caring for. The eyes of Jehovah your God are constantly upon it, from the beginning of the year to the close of the year.
13 “And if you will diligently obey my commandments that I am commanding you today and love Jehovah your God and serve him with all your heart and all your soul,
14 I will also give rain for your land at its appointed time, autumn rain and spring rain, and you will gather your grain and your new wine and your oil.
15 And I will provide vegetation in your fields for your livestock, and you will eat and be satisfied.
16 Be careful not to let your heart be enticed to go astray and worship other gods and bow down to them.
17 Otherwise, Jehovah’s anger will blaze against you, and he will shut up the heavens so that it will not rain and the ground will not give its produce and you will quickly perish from the good land that Jehovah is giving you.
18 “You must impress these words of mine on your heart and your soul and bind them as a reminder on your hand, and they should be like a headband on your forehead.
19 Teach them to your children, speaking about them when you sit in your house and when you walk on the road and when you lie down and when you get up.
20 Write them on the doorposts of your house and on your gates,
21 so that you and your sons may live long in the land that Jehovah swore to give to your forefathers, for as long as the heavens are over the earth.
22 “If you strictly observe this commandment that I am giving you and you carry it out, to love Jehovah your God, to walk in all his ways and to cling to him,
23 Jehovah will drive away all these nations from before you, and you will dispossess nations greater and more numerous than you are.
24 Every place you set your foot will become yours. From the wilderness up to Lebʹa·non, from the River, the river Eu·phraʹtes, to the western sea, your boundary will become.
25 Nobody will stand up to you. Jehovah your God will spread the dread and the fear of you over the whole land on which you walk, just as he promised you.
26 “See, I am putting before you today a blessing and a curse:
27 the blessing if you obey the commandments of Jehovah your God that I am commanding you today,
28 and the curse if you do not obey the commandments of Jehovah your God and you turn aside from the way I am commanding you to follow today and you follow gods that you have not known.
29 “When Jehovah your God brings you into the land you are to possess, you must pronounce the blessing on Mount Gerʹi·zim and the curse on Mount Eʹbal.
30 Are they not on the other side of the Jordan toward the west, in the land of the Caʹnaan·ites who live in the Arʹa·bah, opposite Gilʹgal, beside the big trees of Moʹreh?
31 For you are crossing the Jordan to enter and take possession of the land that Jehovah your God is giving you. When you take possession of it and live in it,
32 you must be careful to carry out all the regulations and the judicial decisions that I am putting before you today.
12 “These are the regulations and the judicial decisions that you should be careful to carry out all the days that you are alive in the land that Jehovah the God of your forefathers will give you to possess.
2 You should completely destroy all the places where the nations you will dispossess have served their gods, whether on the high mountains or on the hills or under any luxuriant tree.
3 You should pull down their altars, shatter their sacred pillars, burn their sacred poles in the fire, and cut down the graven images of their gods, obliterating their very names from that place.
4 “You must not worship Jehovah your God in that way.
5 Rather, seek Jehovah your God wherever he chooses to establish his name and his place of residence among all your tribes, and go there.
6 That is where you are to bring your burnt offerings, your sacrifices, your tithes, the contribution from your hand, your vow offerings, your voluntary offerings, and the firstborn of your herd and flock.
7 You and your households must eat there before Jehovah your God and rejoice in all your undertakings, because Jehovah your God has blessed you.
8 “You must not do as we are doing here today, with everyone doing whatever is right in his own eyes,
9 because you have not yet come into the resting-place and the inheritance that Jehovah your God is giving you.
10 When you do cross the Jordan and dwell in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you to possess, he will certainly give you rest from all your enemies around you, and you will dwell in security.
11 You will bring all that I am commanding you to the place that Jehovah your God chooses to have his name reside—your burnt offerings, your sacrifices, your tithes, the contribution from your hand, and every vow offering that you vow to Jehovah.
12 You will rejoice before Jehovah your God, you and your sons, your daughters, your male and female slaves, and the Levite inside your cities, for he has no share or inheritance with you.
13 Be careful not to offer up your burnt offerings in any other place you may see.
14 You should offer your burnt offerings only in the place that Jehovah chooses in one of your tribal territories, and there you should do everything I am commanding you.
15 “But whenever you desire it, you may slaughter and eat meat, according to the blessing that Jehovah your God has given you in all your cities. The unclean person and the clean person may eat it, as you would eat a gazelle or a deer.
16 But you must not eat the blood; you should pour it out on the ground like water.
17 You will not be allowed to eat within your cities the tenth part of your grain, your new wine, your oil, the firstborn of your herd and flock, any of your vow offerings that you vow, your voluntary offerings, or the contribution from your hand.
18 These you are to eat before Jehovah your God in the place Jehovah your God will choose—you and your son, your daughter, your male and female servant, and the Levite inside your cities; and you will rejoice before Jehovah your God in all your undertakings.
19 Be careful not to neglect the Levite as long as you live in your land.
20 “When Jehovah your God enlarges your territory, just as he has promised you, and you say, ‘I want to eat meat,’ because you desire to eat meat, you may eat meat whenever you desire it.
21 If the place that Jehovah your God chooses to put his name is far away from you, you should then slaughter some of your herd or some of your flock that Jehovah has given you, just as I have commanded you, and you should eat inside your cities whenever you desire it.
22 You may eat it as you would eat the gazelle and the deer; both the unclean person and the clean person may eat it.
23 Just be firmly resolved not to eat the blood, because the blood is the life, and you must not eat the life with the flesh.
24 You must not eat it. You should pour it out on the ground like water.
25 You must not eat it, so that it may go well with you and your children after you, because you are doing what is right in Jehovah’s eyes.
26 You should take only the holy things that are yours and your vow offerings when you come to the place that Jehovah will choose.
27 There you will offer your burnt offerings, the flesh and the blood, on the altar of Jehovah your God, and the blood of your sacrifices should be poured out against the altar of Jehovah your God, but the flesh you may eat.
28 “Be careful to obey all these words that I am commanding you, so that it may always go well with you and your sons after you, because you are doing what is good and right in the eyes of Jehovah your God.
29 “When Jehovah your God annihilates the nations that you are to dispossess, and you are living in their land,
30 be careful not to be entrapped after they have been annihilated from before you. Do not ask about their gods, saying, ‘How were these nations accustomed to serve their gods? I too will do the same.’
31 You must not do this to Jehovah your God, because they do for their gods every detestable thing that Jehovah hates, even burning their sons and their daughters in the fire to their gods.
32 Every word that I am commanding you is what you should be careful to do. You must not add to it nor take away from it.
13 “In case a prophet or one who foretells by dreams arises in your midst and gives you a sign or a portent,
2 and the sign or the portent about which he spoke to you comes true while he is saying, ‘Let us walk after other gods, gods that you have not known, and let us serve them,’
3 you must not listen to the words of that prophet or that dreamer, for Jehovah your God is testing you to know whether you love Jehovah your God with all your heart and all your soul.
4 After Jehovah your God you should walk, him you should fear, his commandments you should keep, to his voice you should listen; he is the one you should serve, and to him you should hold fast.
5 But that prophet or that dreamer should be put to death, because he encouraged rebellion against Jehovah your God—who brought you out of the land of Egypt and redeemed you from the house of slavery—to turn you from the way in which Jehovah your God has commanded you to walk. And you must remove what is evil from your midst.
6 “If your brother, the son of your mother, or your son or your daughter or your cherished wife or your closest companion should try to entice you in secrecy, saying, ‘Let us go and serve other gods,’ gods that neither you nor your forefathers have known,
7 from the gods of the peoples all around you, whether near you or those far away from you, from one end of the land to the other end of the land,
8 you must not give in to him or listen to him, nor should you show pity or feel compassion or protect him;
9 instead, you should kill him without fail. Your hand should be the first to come upon him to put him to death, and the hand of all the people afterward.
10 And you must stone him to death, because he has sought to turn you away from Jehovah your God, who has brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery.
11 Then all Israel will hear and become afraid, and they will never again do anything bad like this among you.
12 “In case you hear it said in one of your cities that Jehovah your God is giving you to occupy,
13 ‘Good-for-nothing men have gone out among you to turn away the inhabitants of their city, saying: “Let us go and serve other gods,” gods that you have not known,’
14 you should look into the matter, making a thorough investigation and inquiry; and if it is confirmed to be true that this detestable thing has been done among you,
15 you should without fail strike down the inhabitants of that city with the sword. Devote it and everything that is in it, including its livestock, to destruction by the sword.
16 You should then collect all its spoil into the middle of its public square and burn the city with fire, and its spoil will serve as a whole offering to Jehovah your God. It will become a permanent heap of ruins. It should never be rebuilt.
17 Your hand should take nothing that was set apart for destruction, so that Jehovah may turn away from his burning anger and show you mercy and compassion and multiply you, just as he has sworn to your forefathers.
18 For you should obey Jehovah your God by keeping all his commandments that I am commanding you today, thus doing what is right in the eyes of Jehovah your God.
14 “You are sons of Jehovah your God. Do not cut yourselves or shave your foreheads bald for a dead person.
2 For you are a holy people to Jehovah your God, and Jehovah has chosen you to become his people, his special property, out of all the peoples who are on the face of the earth.
3 “You must not eat anything that is detestable.
4 These are the animals that you may eat: the bull, the sheep, the goat,
5 the deer, the gazelle, the roebuck, the wild goat, the antelope, the wild sheep, and the mountain sheep.
6 You may eat any animal that has a split hoof divided into two and that chews the cud.
7 However, you must not eat the following animals that chew the cud or that have split hooves: the camel, the hare, and the rock badger, because they chew the cud but do not have split hooves. They are unclean for you.
8 Also the pig because it has a split hoof but does not chew the cud. It is unclean for you. You must not eat their flesh or touch their carcasses.
9 “Of everything that is living in the waters, you may eat these: Anything with fins and scales, you may eat.
10 But you must not eat anything that has no fins and scales. It is unclean for you.
11 “You may eat any clean bird.
12 But you must not eat these: the eagle, the osprey, the black vulture,
13 the red kite, the black kite, every kind of glede,
14 every kind of raven,
15 the ostrich, the owl, the gull, every kind of falcon,
16 the little owl, the long-eared owl, the swan,
17 the pelican, the vulture, the cormorant,
18 the stork, every kind of heron, the hoopoe, and the bat.
19 Every winged swarming creature also is unclean for you. They should not be eaten.
20 Any clean flying creature you may eat.
21 “You must not eat any animal that was found dead. You may give it to the foreign resident who is inside your cities, and he may eat it, or it may be sold to a foreigner. For you are a holy people to Jehovah your God. “You must not boil a young goat in its mother’s milk.
22 “You must without fail give a tenth of everything your seed produces in the field year by year.
23 You will eat the tenth part of your grain, your new wine, your oil, and the firstborn of your herd and your flock before Jehovah your God in the place that he chooses to have his name reside, so that you may learn to fear Jehovah your God always.
24 “But if the journey should be too long for you and you are not able to carry it to the place that Jehovah your God chooses as the place for his name because it is far away from you (because Jehovah your God will bless you),
25 you may then convert it into money, and with your money in hand, travel to the place that Jehovah your God will choose.
26 You may then spend the money on whatever you desire—cattle, sheep, goats, wine and other alcoholic beverages, and anything you please; and you will eat there before Jehovah your God and rejoice, you and your household.
27 And do not neglect the Levite who is inside your cities, for he has no share or inheritance with you.
28 “At the end of every three years, you should bring out the entire tenth part of your produce for that year and deposit it inside your cities.
29 Then the Levite, who has no share or inheritance with you, the foreign resident, the fatherless child, and the widow who are in your cities will come and eat their fill, so that Jehovah your God may bless you in all that you do.
15 “At the end of every seven years, you should grant a release.
2 This is the nature of the release: Every creditor will release his neighbor from the debt he incurred. He should not demand payment from his neighbor or his brother, for it will be proclaimed a release to Jehovah.
3 You may demand payment from the foreigner, but you should release your claim on whatever your brother owes you.
4 However, no one among you should become poor, for Jehovah will surely bless you in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you to possess as an inheritance,
5 but only if you strictly obey the voice of Jehovah your God and carefully observe all this commandment that I am giving you today.
6 For Jehovah your God will bless you just as he has promised you, and you will lend to many nations, but you will not need to borrow; and you will dominate many nations, but they will not dominate you.
7 “If one of your brothers becomes poor among you in one of your cities of the land that Jehovah your God is giving you, do not harden your heart or be tightfisted toward your poor brother.
8 For you should generously open your hand to him and by all means lend whatever he needs or is lacking.
9 Be careful not to harbor this evil idea in your heart, ‘The seventh year, the year of the release, has approached,’ and hold back your generosity toward your poor brother and give him nothing. If he calls out to Jehovah against you, it will be a sin on your part.
10 You should generously give to him, and you should not give to him grudgingly, for this is why Jehovah your God will bless your every deed and undertaking.
11 For there will always be poor people in the land. That is why I am commanding you, ‘You should generously open up your hand to your afflicted and poor brother in your land.’
12 “If one of your brothers, a Hebrew man or woman, is sold to you and has served you for six years, then in the seventh year you should set him free.
13 And if you should set him free, do not send him away empty-handed.
14 You should supply him generously with something from your flock, your threshing floor, and your press for oil and wine. Just as Jehovah your God has blessed you, you should give to him.
15 Remember that you became a slave in the land of Egypt and that Jehovah your God redeemed you. That is why I am commanding you to do this today.
16 “But if he says to you, ‘I will not go out from your company!’ because he loves you and your household, since he has been happy while with you,
17 you should then take an awl and put it through his ear into the door, and he will become your slave for life. You should do the same with your slave girl.
18 Do not consider it a hardship when you set him free and he leaves you, because his service to you for six years was worth twice as much as that of a hired worker, and Jehovah your God has blessed you in everything that was done.
19 “You should sanctify every firstborn male of your herd and your flock to Jehovah your God. You must not do any work with the firstborn of your herd nor shear the firstborn of your flock.
20 You and your household should eat it before Jehovah your God year by year in the place that Jehovah will choose.
21 But if it has a defect—lameness, blindness, or any other serious defect—you must not sacrifice it to Jehovah your God.
22 You should eat it inside your cities, the unclean and clean person together, as though it were a gazelle or a deer.
23 But you must not eat its blood; you should pour it out on the ground like water.
16 “Observe the month of Aʹbib, and celebrate the Passover to Jehovah your God, for in the month of Aʹbib, Jehovah your God brought you out of Egypt by night.
2 And you should sacrifice the Passover offering to Jehovah your God, from the flock and the herd, in the place that Jehovah chooses to have his name reside.
3 You must not eat anything leavened along with it; for seven days you should eat unleavened bread, the bread of affliction, because you came out of the land of Egypt in haste. Do this so that you may remember the day you came out of the land of Egypt as long as you live.
4 No sourdough should be found with you in all your territory for seven days, nor should any of the meat that you will sacrifice in the evening on the first day remain all night until the next morning.
5 You will not be allowed to sacrifice the Passover offering in just any of the cities that Jehovah your God is giving you.
6 But it should be done at the place that Jehovah your God chooses to have his name reside. You should sacrifice the Passover offering in the evening as soon as the sun sets, at the appointed time of your coming out of Egypt.
7 You must cook it and eat it in the place that Jehovah your God will choose, and in the morning you may return to your own tents.
8 Six days you should eat unleavened bread, and on the seventh day there will be a solemn assembly to Jehovah your God. You must do no work.
9 “You should count off seven weeks. You should begin counting off seven weeks from the time you first put the sickle to the standing grain.
10 Then you are to celebrate the Festival of Weeks to Jehovah your God with the voluntary offering from your hand, given in proportion to how Jehovah your God blesses you.
11 And you are to rejoice before Jehovah your God, you and your son, your daughter, your male slave, your female slave, the Levite who is inside your cities, the foreign resident, the fatherless child, and the widow, who are in your midst, in the place that Jehovah your God chooses to have his name reside.
12 Remember that you became a slave in Egypt, and observe and carry out these regulations.
13 “You should celebrate the Festival of Booths for seven days when you make an ingathering from your threshing floor and from your press for oil and wine.
14 Rejoice during your festival, you and your son, your daughter, your male slave, your female slave, the Levite, the foreign resident, the fatherless child, and the widow, who are inside your cities.
15 Seven days you will celebrate the festival to Jehovah your God in the place that Jehovah chooses, for Jehovah your God will bless all your produce and all that you do, and you will become nothing but joyful.
16 “Three times a year, all your males should appear before Jehovah your God in the place that he chooses: at the Festival of Unleavened Bread, the Festival of Weeks, and the Festival of Booths, and none of them should appear before Jehovah empty-handed.
17 The gift that each one brings should be in proportion to the blessing that Jehovah your God has given you.
18 “You should appoint judges and officers for each tribe in all the cities that Jehovah your God is giving you, and they must judge the people with righteous judgment.
19 You must not pervert justice, show partiality, or accept a bribe, for the bribe blinds the eyes of the wise and distorts the words of the righteous.
20 Justice—justice you should pursue, so that you may keep living and take possession of the land that Jehovah your God is giving you.
21 “You should not plant any sort of tree as a sacred pole near the altar of Jehovah your God that you make for yourself.
22 “Neither should you set up a sacred pillar for yourself, something Jehovah your God hates.
17 “You must not sacrifice to Jehovah your God a bull or a sheep that has a defect or anything wrong with it, for it would be detestable to Jehovah your God.
2 “Suppose a man or a woman is found among you, in any of your cities that Jehovah your God is giving you, who is practicing what is bad in the eyes of Jehovah your God and violating his covenant,
3 and he goes astray and worships other gods and he bows down to them or to the sun or the moon or all the army of the heavens, a thing that I have not commanded.
4 When it is reported to you or you hear about it, then you should investigate the matter thoroughly. If it is confirmed to be true that this detestable thing has been done in Israel,
5 you must bring the man or the woman who has done this evil thing out to the city gates, and the man or the woman must be stoned to death.
6 On the testimony of two witnesses or of three witnesses the one who is to die should be put to death. He must not be put to death on the testimony of one witness.
7 The hand of the witnesses should be the first to come against him to put him to death, and the hand of all the people afterward. You must remove what is bad from your midst.
8 “If a case arises in one of your cities that is too difficult for you to judge, whether it is a case involving bloodshed or a legal claim that has been raised or a violent deed that has been committed or other matters of dispute, you should rise up and go to the place that Jehovah your God chooses.
9 Go to the Levitical priests and to the judge serving in those days, and make your inquiry, and they will hand down the decision to you.
10 Then you must act according to the decision that they hand down to you from the place that Jehovah chooses. Be careful to do according to all that they instruct you.
11 You must act according to the law that they show you and according to the decision that they declare to you. Do not deviate from the decision that they will hand down to you, either to the right or to the left.
12 The man who acts presumptuously by not listening to the priest who is ministering to Jehovah your God or to the judge must die. You must remove what is bad from Israel.
13 All the people will then hear and become afraid, and they will not act presumptuously anymore.
14 “When you enter the land that Jehovah your God is giving you and you have taken possession of it and are living in it, and you say, ‘Let me appoint a king over myself like all the nations around me,’
15 in that case, you should without fail appoint a king whom Jehovah your God chooses. You should appoint a king from among your brothers. You are forbidden to appoint over yourself a foreigner who is not your brother.
16 However, he should not acquire many horses for himself or make the people go back to Egypt in order to obtain more horses, since Jehovah told you, ‘You must never go back again by this way.’
17 Neither should he take many wives for himself, so that his heart may not go astray; nor should he acquire vast amounts of silver and gold for himself.
18 When he takes his seat on the throne of his kingdom, he must write for himself in a book a copy of this Law, taken from the one kept by the Levitical priests.
19 “It is to remain with him, and he must read from it all the days of his life, so that he may learn to fear Jehovah his God and observe all the words of this Law and these regulations by carrying them out.
20 Thus his heart will not exalt itself above his brothers, and he will not deviate from the commandment, either to the right or to the left, so that he may remain a long time over his kingdom, he and his sons in the midst of Israel.
18 “The Levitical priests, and indeed the entire tribe of Leʹvi, will have no share or inheritance with Israel. They will eat of the offerings made by fire to Jehovah, which are his inheritance.
2 So they should have no inheritance in the midst of their brothers. Jehovah is their inheritance, just as he has spoken to them.
3 “Now this will be the due right of the priests from the people: Whoever makes a sacrifice, whether a bull or a sheep, is to give the shoulder, the jaws, and the stomach to the priest.
4 The firstfruits of your grain, your new wine, your oil, and the first wool that is shorn from your flock you should give him.
5 Jehovah your God has chosen him and his sons from all your tribes to minister in the name of Jehovah always.
6 “But if a Levite leaves one of your cities in Israel where he was living and he desires to go to the place that Jehovah chooses,
7 he may minister there in the name of Jehovah his God the same as all his brothers, the Levites, who are stationed there before Jehovah.
8 He will receive an equal share of food with them, in addition to what he receives from selling his ancestral possessions.
9 “When you have entered into the land that Jehovah your God is giving you, you must not learn to imitate the detestable practices of those nations.
10 There should not be found in you anyone who makes his son or his daughter pass through the fire, anyone who employs divination, anyone practicing magic, anyone who looks for omens, a sorcerer,
11 anyone binding others with a spell, anyone who consults a spirit medium or a fortune-teller, or anyone who inquires of the dead.
12 For whoever does these things is detestable to Jehovah, and on account of these detestable practices Jehovah your God is driving them away from before you.
13 You should prove yourself blameless before Jehovah your God.
14 “For these nations that you are dispossessing used to listen to those practicing magic and divination, but Jehovah your God has not allowed you to do anything like this.
15 Jehovah your God will raise up for you from among your brothers a prophet like me. You must listen to him.
16 This is in response to what you asked of Jehovah your God in Hoʹreb on the day of the assembly when you said, ‘Do not let me hear the voice of Jehovah my God or see this great fire anymore, so that I do not die.’
17 Then Jehovah said to me, ‘What they have said is good.
18 I will raise up for them from the midst of their brothers a prophet like you, and I will put my words in his mouth, and he will speak to them all that I command him.
19 Indeed, I will require an account from the man who will not listen to my words that he will speak in my name.
20 “‘If any prophet presumptuously speaks a word in my name that I did not command him to speak or speaks in the name of other gods, that prophet must die.
21 However, you may say in your heart: “How will we know that Jehovah has not spoken the word?”
22 When the prophet speaks in the name of Jehovah and the word is not fulfilled or does not come true, then Jehovah did not speak that word. The prophet spoke it presumptuously. You should not fear him.’
19 “When Jehovah your God destroys the nations whose land Jehovah your God is giving you and you have dispossessed them and have settled in their cities and their houses,
2 you should set apart three cities in the midst of your land that Jehovah your God is giving you to possess.
3 You should divide the territory of the land that Jehovah your God has given you to possess into three parts, and prepare the roads so that any manslayer can flee to one of those cities.
4 “Now this is what should take place regarding the manslayer who may flee there in order to live: When he strikes his fellow man unintentionally and he did not previously hate him;
5 as when he goes with his fellow man into the forest to gather wood and he raises his hand to cut the tree with the ax, but the axhead flies off the handle and hits his fellow man and he dies, the manslayer should flee to one of these cities to live.
6 Otherwise, in the heat of anger, the avenger of blood may chase after the manslayer, overtake him, and kill him, because the distance to the city was too far. However, he did not deserve to die, since he did not previously hate his fellow man.
7 That is why I am commanding you: ‘Set three cities apart.’
8 “If Jehovah your God enlarges your territory as he swore to your forefathers and he has given you all the land that he promised to give to your forefathers
9 —provided you faithfully observe all this commandment that I am giving you today, to love Jehovah your God and always to walk in his ways—then you are to add three other cities to these three.
10 In this way no innocent blood will be spilled in your land that Jehovah your God is giving you as an inheritance, and no bloodguilt will come upon you.
11 “But if a man hated his fellow man and he was waiting to attack him and he fatally wounded him and he died, and the man has fled to one of these cities,
12 the elders of his city should then summon him from there and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of blood, and he must die.
13 You should not feel sorry for him, and you must remove the guilt of innocent blood out of Israel, so that it may go well for you.
14 “When you receive your inheritance in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you to possess, you must not move your neighbor’s boundary marker from the place where the ancestors set the boundaries.
15 “No single witness may convict another for any error or any sin that he may commit. On the testimony of two witnesses or on the testimony of three witnesses the matter should be established.
16 If a malicious witness testifies against a man and charges him with some transgression,
17 the two men who have the dispute will stand before Jehovah, before the priests and the judges who will be serving in those days.
18 The judges will thoroughly investigate, and if the man who testified is a false witness and has brought a false charge against his brother,
19 you should do to him just as he had schemed to do to his brother, and you must remove what is bad from your midst.
20 Those who remain will hear and be afraid, and they will never again do anything bad like this among you.
21 You should not feel sorry: Life will be for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.
20 “If you go to war against your enemies and you see their horses and chariots and troops that outnumber yours, do not be afraid of them, for Jehovah your God who brought you up out of the land of Egypt is with you.
2 When you are about to go into battle, the priest should approach and address the people.
3 He should tell them, ‘Hear, O Israel, you are about to do battle with your enemies. Do not be fainthearted. Do not be afraid or be terrified or tremble because of them,
4 for Jehovah your God is marching with you to fight for you against your enemies and to save you.’
5 “The officers too should tell the people, ‘Who has built a new house and has not inaugurated it? Let him return to his house. Otherwise, he may die in the battle and another man will inaugurate it.
6 And who has planted a vineyard and not begun to use it? Let him go and return to his house. Otherwise, he may die in the battle and another man will begin to use it.
7 And who has become engaged to a woman and has not married her? Let him go and return to his house. Otherwise, he might die in the battle and another man will marry her.’
8 The officers should also ask the people, ‘Who is fearful and fainthearted? He should return to his house, so that he may not cause his brothers to lose heart as he has.’
9 When the officers have finished speaking to the people, they should appoint chiefs of the armies to lead the people.
10 “If you approach a city to fight against it, you should also announce to it terms of peace.
11 If it gives a peaceful answer to you and opens up to you, all the people found there will become yours for forced labor, and they will serve you.
12 But if it refuses to make peace with you and instead goes to war with you, you should besiege it,
13 and Jehovah your God will certainly give it into your hand, and you must strike down every male in it with the sword.
14 However, the women, the children, the livestock, and everything that is in the city, all its spoil, you may plunder for yourself, and you will eat the spoil of your enemies, which Jehovah your God has given to you.
15 “That is what you will do to all the cities very far away from you that are not of the cities of these nearby nations.
16 But in the cities of these peoples, which Jehovah your God is giving you as an inheritance, you must not allow any breathing thing to live.
17 Instead, you should devote them completely to destruction, the Hitʹtites, the Amʹor·ites, the Caʹnaan·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites, just as Jehovah your God has commanded you;
18 so that they may not teach you to follow all their detestable practices that they have done for their gods, causing you to sin against Jehovah your God.
19 “If you lay siege to a city and capture it after fighting against it for many days, you should not destroy its trees by wielding an ax against them. You may eat from them, but you should not cut them down. For should you besiege a tree of the field as you would a man?
20 You may destroy only a tree that you know is not used for food. You may cut it down and build siegeworks against the city that is making war against you, until it falls.
21 “If someone is found slain in a field of the land that Jehovah your God is giving you to possess and it is not known who killed him,
2 your elders and judges should go out and measure the distance from the dead body to the cities that surround it.
3 Then the elders of the city nearest to the body should take from the herd a young cow that has never been put to work, that has never pulled in a yoke,
4 and the elders of that city should lead the young cow down to a valley running with water where no tilling or sowing of seed has been done, and they should break the neck of the young cow there in the valley.
5 “And the priests, the Levites, will approach because Jehovah your God has chosen them to minister to him, to pronounce blessings in the name of Jehovah. They will declare how every dispute involving violence should be resolved.
6 Then all the elders of the city who are nearest to the dead body should wash their hands over the young cow whose neck was broken in the valley,
7 and they should declare, ‘Our hands did not shed this blood, nor did our eyes see it shed.
8 Do not hold this against your people Israel, whom you redeemed, O Jehovah, and do not let guilt for innocent blood remain among your people Israel.’ Then the bloodguilt will not be held against them.
9 In this way you will remove the guilt of innocent blood from your midst by doing what is right in Jehovah’s eyes.
10 “If you go to war against your enemies and Jehovah your God defeats them for you and you take them captive,
11 and you see among the captives a beautiful woman and you are attracted to her and you want to take her as your wife,
12 you may bring her into your house. She should then shave her head, attend to her nails,
13 and remove the clothing of her captivity, and dwell in your house. She will weep for her father and her mother a whole month, and afterward you may have relations with her; you will become her husband and she will become your wife.
14 But if you are not pleased with her, you should then let her go wherever she wishes. But you may not sell her for money or treat her harshly, since you have humiliated her.
15 “If a man has two wives and he loves one more than the other and both have borne sons to him and the firstborn son belongs to the unloved one,
16 on the day that he gives his inheritance to his sons, he will not be allowed to treat the son of the loved one as his firstborn at the expense of the son of the unloved one, the firstborn.
17 He should recognize as the firstborn the unloved one’s son by giving him the double portion of everything he has, for that one is the beginning of his procreative power. The right of the firstborn’s position belongs to him.
18 “If a man has a son who is stubborn and rebellious and he does not obey his father or his mother, and they have tried to correct him but he refuses to listen to them,
19 his father and his mother should take hold of him and bring him out to the elders at the gate of his city
20 and say to the elders of his city, ‘This son of ours is stubborn and rebellious, and he refuses to obey us. He is a glutton and a drunkard.’
21 Then all the men of his city must stone him to death. So you must remove what is bad from your midst, and all Israel will hear and become afraid.
22 “If a man commits a sin deserving the sentence of death and he has been put to death and you have hung him on a stake,
23 his dead body should not remain all night on the stake. Instead, you should be sure to bury him on that day, because the one hung up is something accursed of God, and you should not defile your land that Jehovah your God is giving you as an inheritance.
23 “No man who has been castrated by having his testicles crushed or who has had his male organ cut off may come into the congregation of Jehovah.
2 “No illegitimate son may come into the congregation of Jehovah. Even to the tenth generation, none of his descendants may come into the congregation of Jehovah.
3 “No Amʹmon·ite or Moʹab·ite may come into the congregation of Jehovah. Even to the tenth generation, none of their descendants may ever come into the congregation of Jehovah,
4 because they did not come to your aid with food and water when you were on the way going out of Egypt, and because they hired against you Baʹlaam the son of Beʹor from Peʹthor of Mes·o·po·taʹmi·a to curse you.
5 But Jehovah your God refused to listen to Baʹlaam. Rather, Jehovah your God changed the curse into a blessing for you, because Jehovah your God loved you.
6 You should never seek their welfare or their prosperity all your days.
7 “You must not hate an Eʹdom·ite, for he is your brother. “You must not hate an Egyptian, for you became a foreign resident in his country.
8 The third generation of children born to them may enter the congregation of Jehovah.
9 “When you are encamped against your enemies, you should avoid anything bad.
10 If a man becomes unclean because of a nocturnal emission, he should go outside the camp and not reenter the camp.
11 When evening falls, he should wash with water, and then he may return to the camp at sunset.
12 A private place should be designated for use outside the camp, and there is where you should go.
13 A peg should be part of your equipment. When you squat outside, you should dig a hole with it and then cover your excrement.
14 For Jehovah your God is walking about within your camp to deliver you and to hand over your enemies to you, and your camp must be holy, so that he does not see anything indecent in you and turn away from accompanying you.
15 “You should not hand over a slave to his master when he escapes from his master and comes to you.
16 He may dwell among you in whatever place he chooses in one of your cities, wherever he likes. You must not mistreat him.
17 “None of the daughters of Israel may become a temple prostitute, neither may anyone of the sons of Israel become a temple prostitute.
18 You must not bring the price paid to a female prostitute or the price paid to a male prostitute into the house of Jehovah your God to fulfill a vow, for both of them are something detestable to Jehovah your God.
19 “You must not make your brother pay interest, whether interest on money, on food, or on anything on which interest may be charged.
20 You may make a foreigner pay interest, but you must not make your brother pay interest, so that Jehovah your God may bless you in every undertaking of yours in the land you are going to take possession of.
21 “If you make a vow to Jehovah your God, do not be slow about paying it. For Jehovah your God will surely require it of you; otherwise, it will be a sin on your part.
22 But if you refrain from making a vow, you will not be guilty of sin.
23 The word of your lips you should keep, and you must carry out what your own mouth vowed as a voluntary offering to Jehovah your God.
24 “If you enter your neighbor’s vineyard, you may eat enough grapes to satisfy your appetite, but you should not put any in your container.
25 “If you go into your neighbor’s field of standing grain, you may pluck the ripe ears with your hand, but you should not put a sickle to your neighbor’s grain.
24 “If a man marries a woman but she does not please him because he found something indecent about her, he must write out a certificate of divorce for her, hand it to her, and dismiss her from his house.
2 After she leaves his house, she may go and become another man’s wife.
3 If the second man hates her and writes out a certificate of divorce for her, hands it to her, and dismisses her from his house or if the second man who married her should die,
4 her first husband who dismissed her will not be allowed to take her back again as his wife after she has been defiled, for that is something detestable to Jehovah. You must not bring sin into the land that Jehovah your God is giving you as an inheritance.
5 “When a man is newly married, he should not serve in the army or be given any other duties. He should remain exempt for one year and stay at home and bring joy to his wife.
6 “No one should seize a hand mill or its upper millstone as security for a loan, for that would be taking someone’s livelihood as security.
7 “If someone is found to have kidnapped one of his Israelite brothers and he has mistreated him and sold him, the kidnapper must die. You should remove what is bad from your midst.
8 “When there is an outbreak of leprosy, be very careful to do according to all that the Levitical priests will instruct you. Be careful to do exactly as I commanded them.
9 Remember what Jehovah your God did to Mirʹi·am on the way when you were coming out of Egypt.
10 “If you make any sort of loan to your neighbor, you must not enter into his house to seize from him what he has offered as security.
11 You should stand outside, and the man who received the loan should bring outside to you what he is giving as security.
12 And if the man is in need, you must not go to bed with what he gave as security still in your possession.
13 You should by all means return to him what he has given as security as soon as the sun sets, and he will go to bed with his garment, and he will bless you; and it will mean righteousness for you before Jehovah your God.
14 “You must not defraud a hired worker who is in need and poor, whether one of your brothers or a foreign resident in your land, within your cities.
15 You should give him his wages that very day, before the sun sets, because he is in need and his life depends on his wages. Otherwise, he will cry out to Jehovah against you, and you will be guilty of sin.
16 “Fathers should not be put to death for what their children do, and children should not be put to death for what their fathers do. A person should be put to death only for his own sin.
17 “You must not pervert the judgment of the foreign resident or of the fatherless child, and you must not seize the garment of a widow as security for a loan.
18 Remember that you became a slave in Egypt, and Jehovah your God redeemed you from there. That is why I am commanding you to do this.
19 “When you reap your harvest from your field and you have forgotten a sheaf in the field, do not go back to get it. It should be left for the foreign resident, the fatherless child, and the widow, so that Jehovah your God may bless you in all that you do.
20 “When you beat your olive tree, you should not repeat the procedure on its branches. What is left should remain for the foreign resident, the fatherless child, and the widow.
21 “When you gather the grapes of your vineyard, you must not return to gather the leftovers. They should be left for the foreign resident, the fatherless child, and the widow.
22 Remember that you became a slave in the land of Egypt. That is why I am commanding you to do this.
25 “When a dispute arises between men, they may present themselves before the judges, and they will judge them and pronounce the righteous one innocent and the wicked one guilty.
2 If the wicked one deserves to be beaten, the judge will have him lie down prostrate, and he will be beaten in his presence. The number of strokes should correspond to the wickedness of his deed.
3 He may beat him with up to 40 strokes, but no more. If he would continue beating him with more strokes than this, your brother would be disgraced before your eyes.
4 “You must not muzzle a bull when it is threshing out grain.
5 “If brothers dwell together and one of them dies without having a son, the wife of the dead one should not marry someone from outside the family. Her brother-in-law should go to her, take her as his wife, and perform brother-in-law marriage with her.
6 The firstborn whom she will bear will carry on the name of his dead brother, so that his name may not be wiped out of Israel.
7 “Now if the man does not want to marry his brother’s widow, his brother’s widow should then go to the elders at the city gate and say, ‘My husband’s brother has refused to preserve his brother’s name in Israel. He has not consented to perform brother-in-law marriage with me.’
8 The elders of his city must call him and speak to him. Should he insist and say, ‘I do not want to marry her,’
9 then his brother’s widow should approach him before the elders, remove his sandal from his foot, spit in his face, and say, ‘That is what should be done to the man who will not build up his brother’s household.’
10 After that his family name in Israel will be known as ‘The house of the one who had his sandal removed.’
11 “If two men get into a fight with each other and the wife of the one intervenes to protect her husband from the one striking him and she reaches out her hand and grabs hold of him by his private parts,
12 you must amputate her hand. You should not feel sorry.
13 “You must not have in your bag two different stone weights, a large one and a small one.
14 You must not have in your house two different measuring containers, a large one and a small one.
15 You should keep an accurate and honest weight and an accurate and honest measure, so that you will live long in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you.
16 For every unjust person who does such things is detestable to Jehovah your God.
17 “Remember what Amʹa·lek did to you on the way as you were coming out of Egypt,
18 how he met you along the way and attacked all those straggling behind you when you were exhausted and weary. He did not fear God.
19 When Jehovah your God has given you rest from all your enemies around you in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you as an inheritance to possess, you should wipe out the mention of Amʹa·lek from under the heavens. You must not forget.
26 “When eventually you enter into the land that Jehovah your God is giving you as an inheritance and you have taken possession of it and are dwelling in it,
2 you are to take some of the firstfruits of all the produce of the ground, which you will gather from your land that Jehovah your God is giving you, and put them in a basket and go to the place that Jehovah your God chooses to have his name reside.
3 You must go to the priest who will be serving in those days and say to him, ‘Today I am reporting to Jehovah your God that I have come into the land that Jehovah swore to our forefathers to give to us.’
4 “The priest will then take the basket out of your hand and deposit it before the altar of Jehovah your God.
5 Then you are to declare before Jehovah your God, ‘My father was a wandering A·ra·maeʹan, and he went down to Egypt and resided there as a foreigner, with few in his household. But there he became a great nation, mighty and numerous.
6 And the Egyptians mistreated and oppressed us and imposed harsh slavery on us.
7 So we began to cry out to Jehovah, the God of our forefathers, and Jehovah heard our voice and looked upon our affliction and our trouble and our oppression.
8 Finally Jehovah brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm and with terrifying deeds and with signs and miracles.
9 Then he brought us to this place and gave us this land, a land flowing with milk and honey.
10 Now I have brought the firstfruits of the produce of the ground that Jehovah has given me.’ “You must deposit it before Jehovah your God and bow down before Jehovah your God.
11 You will then rejoice over all the good that Jehovah your God has given you and your household, you and the Levite and the foreign resident who is among you.
12 “When you finish tithing the entire tenth of your produce in the third year, the year of the tenth, you will give it to the Levite, the foreign resident, the fatherless child, and the widow, and they will eat their fill within your cities.
13 You will then say before Jehovah your God, ‘I have cleared the holy portion out of my house and given it to the Levite, the foreign resident, the fatherless child, and the widow, just as you have commanded me. I have not violated or neglected your commandments.
14 I have not eaten of it while mourning or removed any of it while unclean or given any of it for the dead. I have obeyed the voice of Jehovah my God and have done all that you commanded me.
15 Now look down from your holy dwelling, the heavens, and bless your people Israel and the land that you have given us, just as you swore to our forefathers, the land flowing with milk and honey.’
16 “This day Jehovah your God is commanding you to carry out these regulations and judicial decisions. You must observe them and carry them out with all your heart and all your soul.
17 Today you have obtained Jehovah’s declaration that he will become your God as you walk in his ways and observe his regulations, his commandments, and his judicial decisions, and as you listen to his voice.
18 And today Jehovah has obtained your declaration that you will become his people, his special property, just as he has promised you, and that you will observe all his commandments
19 and that he will put you high above all the other nations that he has made, giving you praise and fame and glory as you prove yourself a people holy to Jehovah your God, just as he has promised.”
27 Then Moses together with the elders of Israel commanded the people, saying: “Observe every commandment that I am giving you today.
2 And in the day when you will cross the Jordan into the land that Jehovah your God is giving you, set up large stones and cover them with plaster.
3 Then write on them all the words of this Law when you have crossed over, so that you may enter into the land that Jehovah your God is giving you, a land flowing with milk and honey, just as Jehovah, the God of your forefathers, has promised you.
4 When you have crossed the Jordan, you should set up these stones on Mount Eʹbal and cover them with plaster, just as I am commanding you today.
5 You are also to build an altar there to Jehovah your God, an altar of stones. You should not use iron tools on them.
6 You should build the altar of Jehovah your God with whole stones and offer burnt offerings to Jehovah your God on it.
7 You are to offer communion sacrifices and eat them there, and you will rejoice before Jehovah your God.
8 And clearly write on the stones all the words of this Law.”
9 Then Moses and the Levitical priests spoke to all Israel, saying: “Keep silent and listen, O Israel. This day you have become the people of Jehovah your God.
10 You must listen to the voice of Jehovah your God and carry out his commandments and his regulations, which I am commanding you today.”
11 On that day Moses commanded the people, saying:
12 “The following tribes will stand on Mount Gerʹi·zim to bless the people when you have crossed the Jordan: Simʹe·on, Leʹvi, Judah, Isʹsa·char, Joseph, and Benjamin.
13 And the following will stand on Mount Eʹbal to pronounce the curse: Reuʹben, Gad, Ashʹer, Zebʹu·lun, Dan, and Naphʹta·li.
14 And the Levites will answer every man of Israel with a loud voice:
15 “‘Cursed is the man who makes a carved image or a metal statue, a thing detestable to Jehovah, the workmanship of the hands of a craftsman, and who has hidden it.’ (And all the people will respond, saying, ‘Amen!’)
16 “‘Cursed is the one who treats his father or his mother with contempt.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)
17 “‘Cursed is the one who moves his neighbor’s boundary marker.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)
18 “‘Cursed is the one who causes a blind person to lose his way on the road.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)
19 “‘Cursed is the one who perverts the judgment of a foreign resident, a fatherless child, or a widow.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)
20 “‘Cursed is the one who lies down with his father’s wife, for he has dishonored his father.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)
21 “‘Cursed is the one who lies down with any animal.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)
22 “‘Cursed is the one who lies down with his sister, the daughter of his father or the daughter of his mother.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)
23 “‘Cursed is the one who lies down with his mother-in-law.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)
24 “‘Cursed is the one who ambushes and kills his neighbor.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)
25 “‘Cursed is the one who accepts a bribe to kill an innocent person.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)
26 “‘Cursed is the one who will not uphold the words of this Law by carrying them out.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)
28 “And if you will without fail listen to the voice of Jehovah your God by being careful to do all his commandments that I am commanding you today, Jehovah your God will certainly put you high above all other nations of the earth.
2 All these blessings will come upon you and overtake you, because you keep listening to the voice of Jehovah your God:
3 “Blessed you will be in the city, and blessed you will be in the field.
4 “Blessed will be your children and the fruit of your ground and the offspring of your livestock, your young cattle and sheep.
5 “Blessed will be your basket and your kneading bowl.
6 “Blessed you will be when you come in, and blessed you will be when you go out.
7 “Jehovah will cause your enemies who rise up against you to be defeated before you. They will attack you from one direction, but they will flee from you in seven different directions.
8 Jehovah will decree for you a blessing on your storehouses and every undertaking of yours, and he will certainly bless you in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you.
9 Jehovah will establish you as a holy people to himself, just as he swore to you, because you continue to keep the commandments of Jehovah your God and walk in his ways.
10 All the peoples of the earth will have to see that Jehovah’s name has been called upon you, and they will be afraid of you.
11 “Jehovah will make you overflow with many children and much livestock and fruitful ground in the land that Jehovah swore to your forefathers to give you.
12 Jehovah will open up to you his good storehouse, the heavens, to give your land rain in its season and to bless all that you do. You will lend to many nations, while you yourself will not need to borrow.
13 Jehovah will make you the head, and not the tail; and you will be on top, and not on the bottom, if you keep obeying the commandments of Jehovah your God that I am commanding you today to observe and to do.
14 You must not deviate from all the words that I am commanding you today, to the right or to the left, to walk after other gods to serve them.
15 “But if you will not listen to the voice of Jehovah your God by taking care to do all his commandments and his statutes that I am commanding you today, all these curses will come upon you and overtake you:
16 “Cursed you will be in the city, and cursed you will be in the field.
17 “Cursed will be your basket and your kneading bowl.
18 “Cursed will be your children and the fruit of your ground and your young cattle and sheep.
19 “Cursed you will be when you come in, and cursed you will be when you go out.
20 “Jehovah will send upon you the curse, confusion and punishment in every undertaking of yours until you have been annihilated and have quickly perished, because of your bad practices and your forsaking me.
21 Jehovah will cause the disease to cling to you until he has exterminated you from the land you are going to take possession of.
22 Jehovah will strike you with tuberculosis, burning fever, inflammation, feverish heat, the sword, scorching blight, and mildew; and they will pursue you until you have perished.
23 The skies over your head will be copper, and the earth beneath you, iron.
24 Jehovah will make the rain of your land powder and dust that will come down on you from the heavens until you have been annihilated.
25 Jehovah will cause you to be defeated before your enemies. You will attack them from one direction, but you will flee from them in seven different directions; and you will become an object of horror to all the earth’s kingdoms.
26 And your carcasses will become food for every bird of the sky and animal of the ground, with no one to frighten them away.
27 “Jehovah will strike you with the boils of Egypt, piles, eczema, and skin lesions, from which you cannot be healed.
28 Jehovah will strike you with madness and blindness and confusion.
29 You will grope about at midday, just as a blind man gropes about in darkness, and you will not succeed in anything you do; and you will be constantly defrauded and robbed, with no one to save you.
30 You will become engaged to a woman, but another man will rape her. You will build a house, but you will not live in it. You will plant a vineyard, but you will not begin to use it.
31 Your bull will be slaughtered before your eyes, but you will not eat any of it. Your donkey will be stolen right in front of you, but it will not return to you. Your sheep will be given to your enemies, but you will have no savior.
32 Your sons and your daughters will be given to another people while you look on, and you will always long for them, but your hands will be powerless.
33 The fruitage of your ground and all that you produce will be eaten by a people whom you have not known, and you will always be defrauded and crushed.
34 You will be driven mad by what your eyes see.
35 “Jehovah will strike you with painful and incurable boils on your knees and legs, from the sole of your foot to the crown of your head.
36 Jehovah will drive you and the king whom you set up over yourself to a nation that you and your forefathers have not known, and there you will serve other gods, gods of wood and of stone.
37 And you will become an object of horror and of scorn, and a cause for ridicule among all the peoples to whom Jehovah drives you.
38 “You will take much seed out into the field, but you will gather little, because the locust will devour it.
39 Vineyards you will plant and cultivate, but you will drink no wine and gather nothing, because the worm will consume it.
40 You will have olive trees in all your territory, but you will rub no oil on yourself, because your olives will drop off.
41 Sons and daughters you will bear, but they will not remain yours, because they will go off into captivity.
42 Swarms of insects will overwhelm all your trees and the fruitage of your ground.
43 The foreign resident who is in your midst will keep ascending higher and higher over you, while you yourself will keep descending lower and lower.
44 He will lend to you, but you will not lend to him. He will become the head, while you yourself will become the tail.
45 “All these curses will certainly come upon you and pursue you and overtake you until you have been annihilated, because you did not listen to the voice of Jehovah your God by keeping his commandments and his statutes that he commanded you.
46 And they will continue on you and your offspring as a permanent sign and portent,
47 because you did not serve Jehovah your God with rejoicing and joy of heart when you had such an abundance of everything.
48 Jehovah will send your enemies against you, and you will serve them while you are hungry and thirsty and poorly clothed and lacking everything. He will put an iron yoke on your neck until he has annihilated you.
49 “Jehovah will raise up against you a distant nation, from the end of the earth; it will pounce like an eagle, a nation whose language you will not understand,
50 a nation fierce in appearance that will show no regard to the old or favor to the young.
51 They will eat the offspring of your livestock and the fruitage of your ground until you have been annihilated. They will not leave any grain, new wine or oil, young cattle or sheep for you until they have destroyed you.
52 They will besiege you, shutting you up inside all your cities throughout your land until your high and fortified walls that you are trusting in fall down. Yes, they will certainly besiege you within all your cities throughout your land that Jehovah your God has given you.
53 Then you will have to eat your own children, the flesh of your sons and your daughters whom Jehovah your God has given you, because of the severity of the siege and the distress your enemy inflicts on you.
54 “Even the most delicate and sensitive man among you will have no pity on his brother or his cherished wife or his sons who remain,
55 and he will not share with them any of the flesh of his sons that he will eat, because he has nothing else on account of the severity of the siege and the distress your enemy inflicts on your cities.
56 And the delicate and sensitive woman among you who would not even think of putting the sole of her foot on the ground because she is so delicate will show no pity to her cherished husband or her son or her daughter,
57 even toward the afterbirth that comes from between her legs and toward the sons she bears, for she will secretly eat them because of the severity of the siege and the distress your enemy inflicts on your cities.
58 “If you will not carefully observe all the words of this Law that are written in this book and you do not fear this glorious and awe-inspiring name, that of Jehovah your God,
59 Jehovah will inflict very severe plagues on you and your offspring, great and enduring plagues, and grievous and enduring sicknesses.
60 He will bring back upon you all the diseases of Egypt that you used to fear, and they will certainly cling to you.
61 Moreover, Jehovah will even bring upon you every sickness or plague not written in the book of this Law until you have been annihilated.
62 Although you have become as numerous as the stars of the heavens, very few of your number will be left, because you did not listen to the voice of Jehovah your God.
63 “And just as Jehovah once delighted to make you prosper and to multiply you, so Jehovah will delight to destroy you and to annihilate you; and you will be torn from the land you are about to possess.
64 “Jehovah will scatter you among all the nations, from the one end of the earth to the other end of the earth, and there you will have to serve gods of wood and of stone, which you and your forefathers have not known.
65 You will have no peace among those nations nor a place of rest for the sole of your foot. Rather, Jehovah will give you there an anxious heart and failing eyes and a feeling of despair.
66 Your life will be in great peril, and you will feel dread night and day; and you will be uncertain of your survival.
67 In the morning you will say, ‘If only it were evening!’ and in the evening you will say, ‘If only it were morning!’ because of the dread you will feel in your heart and because of what your eyes will see.
68 And Jehovah will certainly bring you back to Egypt by ship, by the way that I told you, ‘You will never see it again,’ and there you will have to sell yourselves to your enemies as male and female slaves, but there will be no buyer.”
30 “When all these words come upon you, the blessing and the curse that I have put before you, and you call them to mind in all the nations where Jehovah your God has dispersed you,
2 and you return to Jehovah your God and listen to his voice according to all that I am commanding you today, you and your sons, with all your heart and all your soul,
3 Jehovah your God will then bring back your captives and show you mercy and regather you from all the peoples where Jehovah your God has scattered you.
4 Even if your people are dispersed to the extremity of the heavens, from there Jehovah your God will gather you and bring you back.
5 Jehovah your God will bring you into the land your fathers took possession of, and you will possess it; and he will make you prosper and will multiply you more than your fathers.
6 Jehovah your God will cleanse your heart and the heart of your offspring, so that you will love Jehovah your God with all your heart and all your soul and you may live.
7 Then Jehovah your God will bring all these curses upon your enemies, who hated and persecuted you.
8 “You will then return and listen to the voice of Jehovah and observe all his commandments that I am commanding you today.
9 Jehovah your God will make you abundantly prosperous in all the work of your hands, multiplying your children and your livestock and the produce of your ground, for Jehovah will again delight to make you prosper, just as he delighted in your forefathers.
10 For then you will listen to the voice of Jehovah your God and keep his commandments and statutes written in this book of the Law, and you will return to Jehovah your God with all your heart and all your soul.
11 “Now this commandment that I am commanding you today is not too difficult for you, nor is it beyond your reach.
12 It is not in the heavens, so that you have to say, ‘Who will ascend to the heavens and get it for us, so that we may hear it and observe it?’
13 Nor is it on the other side of the sea, so that you have to say, ‘Who will cross over to the other side of the sea and get it for us, so that we may hear it and observe it?’
14 For the word is very near you, in your own mouth and in your own heart, so that you may do it.
15 “See, I do put before you today life and good, and death and bad.
16 If you listen to the commandments of Jehovah your God that I am commanding you today, by loving Jehovah your God, by walking in his ways, and by keeping his commandments and his statutes and his judicial decisions, then you will live and multiply, and Jehovah your God will bless you in the land you are going to possess.
17 “But if your heart turns away and you do not listen and you are enticed and bow down to other gods and serve them,
18 I tell you today that you will certainly perish. You will not live long in the land you are crossing the Jordan to possess.
19 I take the heavens and the earth as witnesses against you today that I have put life and death before you, the blessing and the curse; and you must choose life so that you may live, you and your descendants,
20 by loving Jehovah your God, by listening to his voice, and by sticking to him, for he is your life and by him you will endure a long time in the land that Jehovah swore to give to your forefathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.”
32 “Give ear, O heavens, and I will speak, And let the earth hear the words of my mouth.
2 My instruction will fall as the rain; My words will trickle as the dew, As gentle rains upon grass And as copious showers upon vegetation.
3 For I will declare the name of Jehovah. Tell about the greatness of our God!
4 The Rock, perfect is his activity, For all his ways are justice. A God of faithfulness who is never unjust; Righteous and upright is he.
5 They are the ones who have acted corruptly. They are not his children, the defect is their own. They are a crooked and twisted generation!
6 Is this the way that you should treat Jehovah, O foolish and unwise people? Is he not your Father who caused your existence, The One who made you and firmly established you?
7 Remember the days of old; Consider the years of past generations. Ask your father, and he can tell you; Your elders, and they will inform you.
8 When the Most High gave the nations their inheritance, When he divided the sons of Adam from one another, He fixed the boundary of the peoples With regard for the number of the sons of Israel.
9 For Jehovah’s people are his portion; Jacob is his inheritance.
10 He found him in a wilderness land And in an empty, howling desert. He protectively encircled him, took care of him, And safeguarded him as the pupil of his eye.
11 Just as an eagle stirs up its nest, Hovers over its fledglings, Spreading out its wings, taking them, Carrying them on its pinions,
12 Jehovah alone kept leading him; No foreign god was with him.
13 He made him ride upon earth’s high places, So that he ate the produce of the field. He nourished him with honey from the crag And oil out of a flinty rock,
14 Butter of the herd and milk of the flock, Together with the choicest sheep, And rams of Baʹshan, and he-goats, Together with the finest wheat; And you drank wine from the blood of grapes.
15 When Jeshʹu·run grew fat, he kicked out rebelliously. You have grown fat, you have become stout, you have become bloated. So he forsook God, who made him, And despised the Rock of his salvation.
16 They incited him to fury with foreign gods; They were offending him with detestable things.
17 They were sacrificing to demons, not to God, To gods that they had not known, New ones that came along recently, To gods that your forefathers did not know.
18 You forgot the Rock who fathered you, And you did not remember the God who gave birth to you.
19 When Jehovah saw it, he rejected them Because his sons and his daughters offended him.
20 So he said, ‘I will hide my face from them; I will see what will become of them. For they are a perverse generation, Sons in whom there is no faithfulness.
21 They have incited me to fury with what is not a god; They have offended me with their worthless idols. So I will incite them to jealousy with what is not a people; I will offend them with a foolish nation.
22 For my anger has kindled a fire That will burn to the depths of the Grave, And it will consume the earth and its produce And will set ablaze the foundations of mountains.
23 I will increase their calamities; I will use up my arrows on them.
24 They will be exhausted from hunger And eaten up by burning fever and bitter destruction. I will send the teeth of beasts against them And the venom of reptiles of the dust.
25 Outside, a sword will bereave them; Inside, there is terror For both young man and virgin, Infant together with gray-haired man.
26 I would have said: “I will scatter them; I will make the memory of them cease from among men,”
27 If not for my dread of the enemy’s reaction, Because the adversaries might misconstrue it. They might say: “Our power has triumphed; It was not Jehovah who did all of this.”
28 For they are a nation devoid of sense, And there is no understanding among them.
29 If only they were wise! They would ponder over this. They would think about their outcome.
30 How could one chase after 1,000, And two put 10,000 to flight? Not unless their Rock had sold them And Jehovah had surrendered them.
31 For their rock is not like our Rock, Even our enemies have understood this.
32 For their vine is from the vine of Sodʹom And from the terraces of Go·morʹrah. Their grapes are grapes of poison, Their clusters are bitter.
33 Their wine is the venom of serpents, The cruel poison of cobras.
34 Is this not stored up with me, Sealed up in my storehouse?
35 Vengeance is mine, and retribution, At the appointed time when their foot slips, For the day of their disaster is near, And what awaits them will come quickly.’
36 For Jehovah will judge his people, And he will feel pity for his servants When he sees that their strength has waned, And that only the helpless and weak remain.
37 Then he will say, ‘Where are their gods, The rock in whom they sought refuge,
38 Who used to eat the fat of their sacrifices, To drink the wine of their drink offerings? Let them rise up and help you. Let them become your place of refuge.
39 See now that I—I am he, And there are no gods apart from me. I put to death, and I make alive. I wound, and I will heal, And no one can rescue from my hand.
40 For I raise my hand to heaven, And I swear: “As surely as I live forever,”
41 If I sharpen my flashing sword And prepare my hand for judgment, I will pay back vengeance on my adversaries And bring retribution to those who hate me.
42 I will make my arrows drunk with blood, And my sword will eat flesh, With the blood of the slain and the captives, With the heads of the leaders of the enemy.’
43 Be glad, you nations, with his people, For he will avenge the blood of his servants, And he will repay vengeance to his adversaries And will make atonement for the land of his people.”
44 Thus Moses came and recited all the words of this song in the hearing of the people, he and Ho·sheʹa the son of Nun.
45 After Moses finished speaking all these words to all Israel,
46 he said to them: “Take to heart all the words of my warning to you today, so that you may command your sons to take care to do all the words of this Law.
47 For this is no empty word for you, but it means your life, and by this word you may live long in the land that you are crossing the Jordan to possess.”
48 Jehovah spoke to Moses on this same day, saying:
49 “Go up into this mountain of Abʹa·rim, Mount Neʹbo, which is in the land of Moʹab, which faces toward Jerʹi·cho, and view the land of Caʹnaan, which I am giving to the Israelites as a possession.
50 Then you will die on the mountain you are about to ascend, and be gathered to your people, just as Aaron your brother died on Mount Hor and was gathered to his people,
51 because both of you were unfaithful to me among the Israelites at the waters of Merʹi·bah of Kaʹdesh in the wilderness of Zin, because you did not sanctify me before the people of Israel.
52 You will see the land from a distance, but you will not enter the land that I am giving to the people of Israel.”
33 Now this is the blessing that Moses the man of the true God pronounced on the Israelites before his death.
2 He said: “Jehovah—from Siʹnai he came, And he shone upon them from Seʹir. He shone forth in glory from the mountainous region of Paʹran, And with him were holy myriads, At his right hand his warriors.
3 He had affection for his people; All their holy ones are in your hand. They were sitting at your feet; They began to listen to your words.
4 (Moses gave us a command, a law, As a possession of the congregation of Jacob.)
5 And He became king in Jeshʹu·run, When the heads of the people gathered together, Along with all the tribes of Israel.
6 Let Reuʹben live and not die off, And may his men not become few.”
7 And he pronounced this blessing on Judah: “Hear, O Jehovah, the voice of Judah, And may you bring him back to his people. His arms have defended what belongs to him, And may you help him against his adversaries.”
8 Of Leʹvi he said: “Your Thumʹmim and your Uʹrim belong to the man loyal to you, Whom you put to the test at Masʹsah. You began to contend with him by the waters of Merʹi·bah,
9 The man who said to his father and his mother, ‘I have not shown regard to them.’ Even his brothers he did not acknowledge, And he ignored his own sons. For they kept your word, And they observed your covenant.
10 Let them instruct Jacob in your judicial decisions And Israel in your Law. Let them offer up incense as a pleasant aroma for you And a whole offering on your altar.
11 Bless, O Jehovah, his strength, And may you show pleasure in the work of his hands. Crush the legs of those who rise up against him, So that those who hate him may rise up no more.”
12 Of Benjamin he said: “Let the beloved one of Jehovah reside in security by him; While he shelters him the whole day, He will reside between his shoulders.”
13 Of Joseph he said: “May his land be blessed by Jehovah With the choice things of heaven, With dew and the waters from the springs below,
14 With choice things produced by the sun And the choice yield each month,
15 With the choicest things from the ancient mountains And choice things of the enduring hills,
16 With the choice things of the earth and what fills it, And with the approval of the One residing in the thornbush. May they come upon the head of Joseph, On the crown of the head of the one singled out from his brothers.
17 His splendor is like that of a firstborn bull, And his horns are the horns of a wild bull. With them he will push peoples All together to the ends of the earth. They are the tens of thousands of Eʹphra·im, And they are the thousands of Ma·nasʹseh.”
18 Of Zebʹu·lun he said: “Rejoice, O Zebʹu·lun, in your going out, And you, Isʹsa·char, in your tents.
19 They will call peoples to the mountain. There they will offer the sacrifices of righteousness. For they will draw from the abundant wealth of the seas And the hidden hoards of the sand.”
20 Of Gad he said: “Blessed is the one widening the borders of Gad. He lies there like a lion, Ready to tear off the arm, yes, the crown of the head.
21 He will select the first portion for himself, For there the allotment of a lawgiver is reserved. The heads of the people will gather together. The righteousness of Jehovah he will execute, And his judicial decisions with Israel.”
22 Of Dan he said: “Dan is a lion cub. He will leap out from Baʹshan.”
23 Of Naphʹta·li he said: “Naphʹta·li is satisfied with the approval And full of the blessing of Jehovah. Take possession of the west and south.”
24 Of Ashʹer he said: “Blessed with sons is Ashʹer. May he be favored by his brothers, And may he dip his feet in oil.
25 Iron and copper are your gate locks, And you will be secure all your days.
26 There is none like the true God of Jeshʹu·run, Who rides through heaven to help you And who rides upon the clouds in his majesty.
27 God is a refuge from ancient times, His everlasting arms are beneath you. And he will drive away the enemy from before you, And he will say, ‘Annihilate them!’
28 Israel will reside in security, And the fountain of Jacob will be secluded In a land of grain and new wine, Whose skies will drip with dew.
29 Happy you are, O Israel! Who is there like you, A people enjoying salvation in Jehovah, Your protective shield And your majestic sword? Your enemies will cringe before you, And you will tread on their backs.”
1 After the death of Moses the servant of Jehovah, Jehovah said to Joshua the son of Nun, the minister of Moses:
2 “Moses my servant is dead. Now get up, cross the Jordan, you and all this people, and go into the land that I am giving to them, to the people of Israel.
3 I will give you every place on which you set your foot, just as I promised Moses.
4 Your territory will extend from the wilderness up to Lebʹa·non and to the great river, the Eu·phraʹtes—all the land of the Hitʹtites—and to the Great Sea on the west.
5 No one will be able to take a stand against you as long as you live. Just as I was with Moses, so I will be with you. I will neither desert you nor abandon you.
6 Be courageous and strong, for you are the one who will cause this people to inherit the land that I swore to their forefathers I would give to them.
7 “Only be courageous and very strong, and observe carefully the entire Law that Moses my servant commanded you. Do not deviate from it either to the right or to the left, so that you may act wisely wherever you go.
8 This book of the Law should not depart from your mouth, and you must read it in an undertone day and night, in order to observe carefully all that is written in it; for then your way will be successful and then you will act wisely.
9 Have I not commanded you? Be courageous and strong. Do not be struck with terror or fear, for Jehovah your God is with you wherever you go.”
10 Then Joshua commanded the officers of the people:
11 “Pass throughout the camp and give this command to the people, ‘Get provisions ready, because in three days you will cross the Jordan to go in and take possession of the land that Jehovah your God is giving you to possess.’”
12 And to the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh, Joshua said:
13 “Remember what Moses the servant of Jehovah commanded you: ‘Jehovah your God is giving you rest and has given you this land.
14 Your wives, your children, and your livestock will dwell in the land that Moses has given you on this side of the Jordan, but all you mighty warriors should cross over in battle formation ahead of your brothers. You must help them
15 until Jehovah gives your brothers rest, just as he has given you, and they also take possession of the land that Jehovah your God is giving them. Then return to the land you were given to occupy and take possession of it, the land that Moses the servant of Jehovah gave you on the east side of the Jordan.’”
16 They answered Joshua: “We will do all that you have commanded, and we will go wherever you send us.
17 Just as we listened to everything Moses said, so we will listen to you. Only may Jehovah your God be with you just as he was with Moses.
18 Any man who rebels against your order and does not obey every command you give him will be put to death. Only be courageous and strong.”
2 Then Joshua the son of Nun secretly sent two men out from Shitʹtim as spies. He told them: “Go and inspect the land, especially Jerʹi·cho.” So they went and came to the house of a prostitute named Raʹhab, and they stayed there.
2 The king of Jerʹi·cho was told: “Look! Israelite men have come in here tonight to spy out the land.”
3 At that the king of Jerʹi·cho sent word to Raʹhab: “Bring out the men who came and are staying in your house, for they have come to spy out the entire land.”
4 But the woman took the two men and hid them. Then she said: “Yes, the men came to me, but I did not know where they were from.
5 And at dark when the city gate was about to be closed, the men went out. I do not know where the men went, but if you quickly chase after them, you will catch up with them.”
6 (However, she had taken them up to the roof and hidden them among stalks of flax laid in rows on the roof.)
7 So the men chased after them in the direction of the Jordan at the fords, and the city gate was shut once the pursuers had gone out.
8 Before the men lay down to sleep, she came up to them on the roof.
9 She said to the men: “I do know that Jehovah will give you the land and that the fear of you has fallen upon us. All the inhabitants of the land are disheartened because of you,
10 for we heard how Jehovah dried up the waters of the Red Sea before you when you left Egypt and what you did to the two kings of the Amʹor·ites, Siʹhon and Og, whom you devoted to destruction on the other side of the Jordan.
11 When we heard about it, we lost heart, and no one has any courage because of you, for Jehovah your God is God in the heavens above and on the earth beneath.
12 Now, please, swear to me by Jehovah that, because I showed loyal love to you, you will also show loyal love to my father’s household; and you must give me a sign of good faith.
13 You must spare the lives of my father and mother, my brothers and sisters, and all who belong to them, and you must save us from death.”
14 At that the men said to her: “We will give our lives for yours! If you do not tell about our mission, then we will show loyal love and faithfulness toward you when Jehovah gives us the land.”
15 After that she let them down by a rope through the window, for her house was on a side of the city wall. In fact, she was dwelling on the wall.
16 Then she said to them: “Go to the mountainous region and hide there for three days, so that those pursuing you may not find you. Then, after your pursuers have come back, you can go on your way.”
17 The men said to her: “We will be free from guilt respecting this oath that you made us swear
18 unless, when we come into the land, you tie this cord of scarlet thread in the window by which you let us down. You should gather your father, your mother, your brothers, and all your father’s household with you into the house.
19 Then if anyone goes out the doors of your house into the open, his blood will be on his own head, and we will be free from guilt. But if harm comes to anyone who remains with you in the house, his blood will be on our heads.
20 But if you report our mission, we will be free from guilt respecting your oath that you made us swear.”
21 She replied: “Let it be according to your words.” With that she sent them off, and they went their way. Afterward, she tied the scarlet cord in the window.
22 So they left and went to the mountainous region and stayed there for three days, until the pursuers returned. The pursuers had been looking for them on every road but did not find them.
23 The two men then descended from the mountainous region and crossed the river and came to Joshua the son of Nun. They related to him all the things that had happened to them.
24 Then they said to Joshua: “Jehovah has handed over the entire land to us. In fact, all the inhabitants of the land are disheartened because of us.”
6 Now Jerʹi·cho was tightly shut up because of the Israelites; no one was leaving and no one was entering.
2 Jehovah then said to Joshua: “See, I have handed over to you Jerʹi·cho and its king and its mighty warriors.
3 All you fighting men should march around the city, going around the city once. That is what you should do for six days.
4 Have seven priests carry seven ram’s horns before the Ark. But on the seventh day, you should march around the city seven times and the priests should blow the horns.
5 When the ram’s horn is sounded—as soon as you hear the sound of the horn—all the people should shout a great war cry. Then the wall of the city will fall down flat, and the people must go up, each one straight ahead.”
6 So Joshua the son of Nun called the priests together and told them: “Take up the ark of the covenant, and seven priests should carry seven ram’s horns before the Ark of Jehovah.”
7 Then he told the people: “Move on and march around the city, and the armed troops should go ahead of the Ark of Jehovah.”
8 And just as Joshua had spoken to the people, the seven priests carrying seven ram’s horns before Jehovah went forward and blew the horns, and the ark of the covenant of Jehovah was following them.
9 And the armed troops went ahead of the priests who were blowing the horns, and the rear guard followed the Ark as the horns were blown continuously.
10 Now Joshua had commanded the people: “Do not shout nor let your voices be heard. Not a word should come out of your mouths until the day I say to you, ‘Shout!’ Then shout.”
11 He had the Ark of Jehovah go around the city, going around it once, after which they returned to the camp and spent the night there.
12 The next morning Joshua got up early, and the priests took up the Ark of Jehovah,
13 and seven priests carrying seven ram’s horns walked before the Ark of Jehovah, continuously blowing the horns. The armed troops were walking ahead of them while the rear guard was following the Ark of Jehovah as the horns were blown continuously.
14 They marched around the city on the second day once, after which they returned to the camp. That was what they did for six days.
15 On the seventh day they got up early, as soon as the dawn broke, and they marched around the city in the same manner seven times. It was only on that day that they marched around the city seven times.
16 And on the seventh time, the priests blew the horns, and Joshua told the people: “Shout, for Jehovah has given you the city!
17 The city and everything in it is to be devoted to destruction; it all belongs to Jehovah. Only Raʹhab the prostitute may keep living, she and all who are with her in the house, because she hid the messengers we sent out.
18 But keep away from what is devoted to destruction, so that you do not desire something devoted to destruction and take it, making the camp of Israel something devoted to destruction by bringing disaster on it.
19 But all the silver and the gold and the articles of copper and iron are holy to Jehovah. They should go into the treasury of Jehovah.”
20 Then the people shouted when the horns were blown. As soon as the people heard the sound of the horn and shouted a great war cry, the wall fell down flat. After that the people went up into the city, each one straight ahead, and they captured the city.
21 They devoted all that was in the city to destruction by the sword, man and woman, young and old, bull, sheep, and donkey.
22 Joshua said to the two men who had spied out the land: “Go into the house of the prostitute and bring out the woman and all who belong to her, just as you swore to her.”
23 So the young spies went in and brought out Raʹhab, along with her father, her mother, her brothers, and all who belonged to her; yes, they brought out her whole family, and they brought them safely to a place outside the camp of Israel.
24 Then they burned the city and everything in it with fire. But the silver, the gold, and the articles of copper and iron, they gave to the treasury of Jehovah’s house.
25 Only Raʹhab the prostitute and her father’s household and all who belonged to her were spared by Joshua; and she lives in Israel to this day, because she hid the messengers whom Joshua sent out to spy on Jerʹi·cho.
26 At that time Joshua pronounced this oath: “Cursed be the man before Jehovah who undertakes to rebuild this city of Jerʹi·cho. At the cost of his firstborn he will lay its foundation, and at the cost of his youngest he will put up its doors.”
27 So Jehovah was with Joshua, and his fame spread through all the earth.
8 Then Jehovah said to Joshua: “Do not be afraid or be terrified. Take with you all the fighting men and go up against Aʹi. See, I have handed over to you the king of Aʹi, his people, his city, and his land.
2 Do to Aʹi and to its king just as you did to Jerʹi·cho and its king, except you may plunder its spoil and its livestock for yourselves. Set an ambush behind the city.”
3 So Joshua and all the fighting men went up against Aʹi. Joshua chose 30,000 mighty warriors and sent them off by night.
4 He gave them this command: “See, you are to lie in ambush behind the city. Do not go very far from the city, and all of you be ready.
5 I and all the people with me will approach the city, and when they come out against us as before, we will retreat from them.
6 When they come out after us, we will draw them away from the city, for they will say, ‘They are retreating from us just as before.’ And we will retreat from them.
7 Then you should rise up from the ambush and capture the city; Jehovah your God will hand it over to you.
8 As soon as you have seized the city, you should set it on fire. You should do according to Jehovah’s word. See, I have given you your orders.”
9 Then Joshua sent them out, and they marched to the place of ambush; they took a position between Bethʹel and Aʹi, to the west of Aʹi, while Joshua spent that night with the people.
10 After Joshua rose up early in the morning and gathered the troops, he and the elders of Israel led them to Aʹi.
11 All the fighting men who were with him marched up and advanced to the front of the city. They camped to the north of Aʹi, with the valley between them and Aʹi.
12 In the meantime, he had taken about 5,000 men and had set them as an ambush between Bethʹel and Aʹi, to the west of the city.
13 So the people set the main camp to the north of the city and the rear guard west of the city, and Joshua went that night into the middle of the valley.
14 And as soon as the king of Aʹi saw this, he and the men of the city hurried out early in the morning to meet Israel in battle at a certain place overlooking the desert plain. But he did not know that there was an ambush set against him to the rear of the city.
15 When the men of Aʹi attacked, Joshua and all Israel fled along the road in the direction of the wilderness.
16 Then all the people who were in the city were summoned to pursue them; and as they pursued Joshua they were drawn away from the city.
17 Not a man was remaining in Aʹi and Bethʹel who did not go out after Israel. They left the city wide open and pursued Israel.
18 Jehovah now said to Joshua: “Stretch out the javelin that is in your hand toward Aʹi, for into your hand I will give it.” So Joshua stretched out the javelin that was in his hand toward the city.
19 The moment he stretched out his hand, the ambush rose up quickly from its place and ran into the city and captured it. They immediately set the city on fire.
20 When the men of Aʹi turned around, they saw the smoke of the city rising to the sky, and they had no strength to flee in any direction. Then the people who had been fleeing toward the wilderness turned on their pursuers.
21 When Joshua and all Israel saw that the ambush had captured the city and saw the smoke of the city rising, they turned around and attacked the men of Aʹi.
22 And the others came out of the city to meet them, so that the men of Aʹi were trapped in the middle, with some Israelites on this side and some on that side, and they struck them down until there was not one survivor or escapee remaining.
23 But they caught the king of Aʹi alive and brought him before Joshua.
24 After Israel finished killing all the inhabitants of Aʹi in the field, in the wilderness where they had pursued them, and every last one of them had fallen by the sword, then all Israel returned to Aʹi and struck it with the sword.
25 All those who fell on that day, from man to woman, amounted to 12,000, all the people of Aʹi.
26 Joshua did not draw back his hand with which he had stretched out the javelin until he had devoted all the inhabitants of Aʹi to destruction.
27 However, Israel took the livestock and the spoil of that city for themselves, according to the orders that Jehovah had given to Joshua.
28 Then Joshua burned Aʹi and reduced it to a permanent mound of ruins, as it remains to this day.
29 He hung the king of Aʹi on a stake until the evening, and as the sun was about to set, Joshua gave the order to take his dead body down from the stake. Then they pitched it at the entrance of the city gate and raised up a great pile of stones over him, which is there to this day.
30 It was then that Joshua built an altar on Mount Eʹbal to Jehovah the God of Israel,
31 just as Moses the servant of Jehovah had commanded the Israelites and as it is written in the book of the Law of Moses: “An altar of whole stones on which no iron tool has been wielded.” On it they offered up burnt offerings to Jehovah as well as communion sacrifices.
32 Then he wrote there on the stones a copy of the Law that Moses had written before the Israelites.
33 All Israel, their elders, the officers, and their judges were standing on both sides of the Ark in front of the Levitical priests who were carrying the ark of the covenant of Jehovah. The foreign residents were there as well as the natives. Half of them stood in front of Mount Gerʹi·zim, and the other half in front of Mount Eʹbal (just as Moses the servant of Jehovah had previously commanded), to bless the people of Israel.
34 After this he read aloud all the words of the Law, the blessings and the curses, according to all that is written in the book of the Law.
35 There was not a word of all that Moses had commanded that Joshua did not read aloud in front of all the congregation of Israel, including the women and children and the foreign residents who were living among them.
9 When all the kings who were on the west side of the Jordan heard what had happened, those in the mountainous region, in the She·pheʹlah, along the entire coast of the Great Sea, and in front of Lebʹa·non—the Hitʹtites, the Amʹor·ites, the Caʹnaan·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites—
2 they formed an alliance to fight against Joshua and Israel.
3 The inhabitants of Gibʹe·on also heard what Joshua had done to Jerʹi·cho and Aʹi.
4 So they acted shrewdly and put provisions into worn-out sacks on their donkeys, along with worn-out wineskins that had burst and had been mended;
5 they also had worn-out and patched sandals on their feet, and they were wearing worn-out garments. All the bread of their provisions was dry and crumbly.
6 Then they went to Joshua at the camp at Gilʹgal and said to him and the men of Israel: “We have come from a distant land. Now make a covenant with us.”
7 But the men of Israel said to the Hiʹvites: “Perhaps you are living near us. So how can we make a covenant with you?”
8 They replied to Joshua: “We are your servants.” Then Joshua said to them: “Who are you, and where do you come from?”
9 At this they said to him: “Your servants have come from a very distant land out of regard for the name of Jehovah your God, because we have heard about his fame and about all he did in Egypt
10 and about all he did to the two kings of the Amʹor·ites who were on the other side of the Jordan, King Siʹhon of Heshʹbon and King Og of Baʹshan, who was in Ashʹta·roth.
11 So our elders and all the inhabitants of our land told us, ‘Take provisions with you for the journey and go to meet them. Tell them: “We will be your servants; now make a covenant with us.”’
12 This bread that we took as our provisions was still hot on the day we left our houses to come here to you. Now you can see it is dry and crumbly.
13 And these wineskins were new when we filled them, but now they have burst. And our garments and sandals have worn out because of the great length of the journey.”
14 At that the men took some of their provisions, but they did not inquire of Jehovah.
15 So Joshua made peace with them and made a covenant with them to let them live, and that is what the chieftains of the assembly swore to them in an oath.
16 At the end of three days, after they made a covenant with them, they heard that they lived nearby, in their vicinity.
17 Then the Israelites set out and came to their cities on the third day; their cities were Gibʹe·on, Che·phiʹrah, Be·erʹoth, and Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim.
18 But the Israelites did not attack them, because the chieftains of the assembly had sworn an oath to them by Jehovah the God of Israel. So all the assembly began to murmur against the chieftains.
19 At this all the chieftains said to the entire assembly: “Since we swore an oath to them by Jehovah the God of Israel, we are not allowed to hurt them.
20 This is what we will do: We will let them live, so that there is no indignation against us because of the oath that we swore to them.”
21 And the chieftains added: “Let them live, but let them become gatherers of wood and drawers of water for all the assembly.” This is what the chieftains promised them.
22 Joshua now called them and said to them: “Why did you trick us by saying, ‘We are from a place very far away from you,’ when you really live right among us?
23 From now on you are cursed, and you will always occupy a slave’s position as gatherers of wood and drawers of water for the house of my God.”
24 They answered Joshua: “It was because your servants were plainly told that Jehovah your God had commanded Moses his servant to give you all the land and to annihilate all its inhabitants from before you. So we were afraid for our lives because of you, and that is why we did this.
25 Now we are at your mercy. Do to us whatever you think is good and right.”
26 And that is what he did with them; he saved them from the hands of the Israelites, and they did not kill them.
27 But that day Joshua made them gatherers of wood and drawers of water for the assembly and for Jehovah’s altar at the place that He should choose, and they remain so to this day.
10 As soon as King A·doʹni-zeʹdek of Jerusalem heard that Joshua had captured Aʹi and devoted it to destruction, doing to Aʹi and its king just as he had done to Jerʹi·cho and its king, and how the inhabitants of Gibʹe·on had made peace with Israel and remained among them,
2 he was greatly alarmed, because Gibʹe·on was a great city, like one of the royal cities. It was greater than Aʹi, and all its men were warriors.
3 So A·doʹni-zeʹdek king of Jerusalem sent this message to Hoʹham king of Hebʹron, Piʹram king of Jarʹmuth, Ja·phiʹa king of Laʹchish, and Deʹbir king of Egʹlon:
4 “Come to my aid, and let us attack Gibʹe·on, because it has made peace with Joshua and the Israelites.”
5 At this the five kings of the Amʹor·ites—the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebʹron, the king of Jarʹmuth, the king of Laʹchish, and the king of Egʹlon—gathered together along with their armies, and they marched on and encamped against Gibʹe·on to fight against it.
6 Then the men of Gibʹe·on sent word to Joshua at the camp at Gilʹgal: “Do not forsake your slaves. Come quickly! Rescue us and help us! All the kings of the Amʹor·ites from the mountainous region have gathered against us.”
7 So Joshua went up from Gilʹgal with all the fighting men and the mighty warriors.
8 Jehovah then said to Joshua: “Do not be afraid of them, for I have handed them over to you. Not one of them will be able to stand against you.”
9 Joshua came against them by surprise after marching all night long from Gilʹgal.
10 Jehovah threw them into confusion before Israel, and they inflicted a great slaughter on them at Gibʹe·on, pursuing them by way of the ascent of Beth-hoʹron and striking them down as far as A·zeʹkah and Mak·keʹdah.
11 While they were fleeing from Israel and were on the descent of Beth-hoʹron, Jehovah hurled great hailstones from the sky on them as far as A·zeʹkah, and they perished. In fact, more died from the hail than from the sword of the Israelites.
12 It was then, on the day that Jehovah routed the Amʹor·ites before the eyes of the Israelites, that Joshua said to Jehovah before Israel: “Sun, stand still over Gibʹe·on, And moon, over the Valley of Aiʹja·lon!”
13 So the sun stood still and the moon did not move until the nation could take vengeance on its enemies. Is it not written in the book of Jaʹshar? The sun stood still in the middle of the sky and did not hasten to set for about a whole day.
14 There has never been a day like that one, either before it or after it, when Jehovah listened to the voice of a man, for Jehovah was fighting for Israel.
15 After that Joshua together with all Israel returned to the camp at Gilʹgal.
16 Meanwhile, the five kings fled and hid in the cave at Mak·keʹdah.
17 Then it was reported to Joshua: “The five kings have been found hiding in the cave at Mak·keʹdah.”
18 So Joshua said: “Roll large stones over the mouth of the cave and assign men to guard them.
19 But the rest of you should not stop. Pursue your enemies and strike them from the rear. Do not allow them to enter into their cities, for Jehovah your God has given them into your hands.”
20 After Joshua and the Israelites had finished inflicting a very great slaughter on them, to the point of wiping them out except for some survivors who escaped and entered into the fortified cities,
21 all the people returned safely to Joshua at the camp at Mak·keʹdah. Not a man dared to utter a word against the Israelites.
22 Then Joshua said: “Open the mouth of the cave and bring the five kings out of the cave to me.”
23 So they brought to him from the cave these five kings: the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebʹron, the king of Jarʹmuth, the king of Laʹchish, and the king of Egʹlon.
24 When they brought these kings to Joshua, he summoned all the men of Israel and said to the commanders of the fighting men who had gone with him: “Come forward. Place your feet on the backs of the necks of these kings.” So they came forward and placed their feet on the backs of their necks.
25 Then Joshua said to them: “Do not be afraid or be terrified. Be courageous and strong, for this is what Jehovah will do to all your enemies against whom you are fighting.”
26 Then Joshua struck them and put them to death and hung them on five stakes, and they remained hanging on the stakes until the evening.
27 At sunset Joshua ordered that they be taken down off the stakes and thrown into the cave where they had hidden themselves. Then large stones were placed at the mouth of the cave, and these remain to this very day.
28 Joshua captured Mak·keʹdah on that day and struck it with the sword. He devoted its king and everyone in it to destruction, letting no survivor remain. He did to the king of Mak·keʹdah just as he had done to the king of Jerʹi·cho.
29 Then Joshua together with all Israel went from Mak·keʹdah to Libʹnah and fought against Libʹnah.
30 Jehovah also gave it and its king into Israel’s hand, and they struck it and everyone in it with the sword, not letting a survivor remain in it. So they did to its king just as they had done to the king of Jerʹi·cho.
31 Next Joshua together with all Israel went from Libʹnah to Laʹchish and camped there and fought against it.
32 Jehovah gave Laʹchish into Israel’s hand, and they captured it on the second day. They struck it and everyone in it with the sword, just as they had done to Libʹnah.
33 Then Hoʹram king of Geʹzer went up to help Laʹchish, but Joshua struck him and his people down until not one survivor remained.
34 Then Joshua together with all Israel went from Laʹchish to Egʹlon and camped there and fought against it.
35 They captured it on that day and struck it with the sword. They devoted everyone in it to destruction on that day, just as they had done to Laʹchish.
36 Then Joshua together with all Israel went up from Egʹlon to Hebʹron and fought against it.
37 They captured it and struck it, its king, its towns, and everyone in it with the sword, not letting any survivor remain. Just as he had done to Egʹlon, he devoted it and everyone in it to destruction.
38 Finally Joshua together with all Israel turned toward Deʹbir and fought against it.
39 He captured it, its king, and all its towns, and they struck them down with the sword, devoting everyone in it to destruction, not letting any survivor remain. He did to Deʹbir and its king just as he had done to Hebʹron and to Libʹnah and its king.
40 Joshua conquered all the land of the mountainous region, the Negʹeb, the She·pheʹlah, and the slopes, and all their kings, not letting any survivor remain; he devoted everything that breathed to destruction, just as Jehovah the God of Israel had commanded.
41 Joshua conquered them from Kaʹdesh-barʹne·a to Gazʹa and all the land of Goʹshen and up to Gibʹe·on.
42 Joshua captured all these kings and their land, all at the same time, because it was Jehovah the God of Israel who was fighting for Israel.
43 Then Joshua returned with all Israel to the camp at Gilʹgal.
11 As soon as Jaʹbin king of Haʹzor heard of it, he sent word to Joʹbab king of Maʹdon, and to the king of Shimʹron, the king of Achʹshaph,
2 the kings who were in the northern mountainous region, those in the plains south of Chinʹne·reth, those in the She·pheʹlah and on the slopes of Dor to the west,
3 the Caʹnaan·ites to the east and the west, the Amʹor·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Jebʹu·sites in the mountainous region, and the Hiʹvites at the base of Herʹmon in the land of Mizʹpah.
4 So they came out with all their armies, a vast multitude as numerous as the grains of sand on the seashore, together with very many horses and war chariots.
5 All these kings agreed to meet, and they came and camped together at the waters of Merʹom to fight against Israel.
6 At this Jehovah said to Joshua: “Do not be afraid because of them, for about this time tomorrow, I am giving over all of them slain to Israel. Their horses you must hamstring, and their chariots you must burn in the fire.”
7 Joshua together with all the fighting men then launched a surprise attack against them along the waters of Merʹom.
8 Jehovah gave them into Israel’s hand, and they defeated them and pursued them as far as Great Siʹdon and Misʹre·photh-maʹim and the Valley of Mizʹpeh to the east, and they struck them down until no survivors remained.
9 Joshua then did to them just as Jehovah had told him; he hamstrung their horses and burned their chariots in the fire.
10 Moreover, Joshua then returned and captured Haʹzor and struck down its king with the sword, because Haʹzor had formerly been the head of all these kingdoms.
11 They struck down everyone in it with the sword, devoting them to destruction. Not a breathing thing was left. Then he burned Haʹzor in the fire.
12 Joshua captured all the cities of these kings and defeated all their kings with the sword. He devoted them to destruction, just as Moses the servant of Jehovah had commanded.
13 However, Israel did not burn any of the cities that stood on their mounds except Haʹzor; it was the only one Joshua burned.
14 All the spoil of these cities and the livestock, the Israelites plundered for themselves. But they struck every human with the sword until they had annihilated each one. They did not let anyone who breathed remain.
15 Just as Jehovah had commanded Moses his servant, so Moses commanded Joshua, and so Joshua did. He left nothing undone of all that Jehovah had commanded Moses.
16 Joshua conquered all this land, the mountainous region, all the Negʹeb, all the land of Goʹshen, the She·pheʹlah, the Arʹa·bah, and the mountainous region of Israel and its She·pheʹlah,
17 from Mount Haʹlak, which goes up to Seʹir, and as far as Baʹal-gad in the Valley of Lebʹa·non at the base of Mount Herʹmon, and he captured all their kings and defeated them, putting them to death.
18 Joshua waged war with all these kings for quite some time.
19 There was no city that made peace with the Israelites except the Hiʹvites inhabiting Gibʹe·on. They conquered all the others by war.
20 It was Jehovah who allowed their hearts to become stubborn so that they waged war against Israel, in order for him to devote them to destruction without any favorable consideration. They were to be annihilated, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
21 At that time Joshua wiped out the Anʹa·kim from the mountainous region, from Hebʹron, Deʹbir, Aʹnab, and all the mountainous region of Judah and all the mountainous region of Israel. Joshua devoted them and their cities to destruction.
22 There were no Anʹa·kim left in the land of the Israelites; they remained only in Gazʹa, in Gath, and in Ashʹdod.
23 So Joshua took control of all the land, just as Jehovah had promised Moses, and then Joshua gave it as an inheritance to Israel by their shares to be divided among their tribes. And the land had rest from war.
16 And the land that fell by lot to the descendants of Joseph was from the Jordan at Jerʹi·cho to the waters east of Jerʹi·cho, through the wilderness going up from Jerʹi·cho into the mountainous region of Bethʹel.
2 It extended from Bethʹel belonging to Luz and continued to the boundary of the Arʹchites at Atʹa·roth,
3 then it went down westward to the boundary of the Japhʹle·tites as far as the boundary of Lower Beth-hoʹron and Geʹzer, and it ended at the sea.
4 So Joseph’s descendants, Ma·nasʹseh and Eʹphra·im, took possession of their land.
5 The boundary of the descendants of Eʹphra·im by their families was as follows: The boundary of their inheritance to the east was Atʹa·roth-adʹdar, as far as Upper Beth-hoʹron,
6 and the boundary extended to the sea. Mich·meʹthath was on the north, and the boundary went around east to Taʹa·nath-shiʹloh, and it passed on the east to Ja·noʹah.
7 Then it went down from Ja·noʹah to Atʹa·roth and Naʹa·rah and reached to Jerʹi·cho and extended to the Jordan.
8 From Tapʹpu·ah the boundary continued westward to the Wadi of Kaʹnah, and it ended at the sea. This is the inheritance of the tribe of Eʹphra·im by their families;
9 the descendants of Eʹphra·im also had enclave cities in the midst of the inheritance of Ma·nasʹseh, all the cities and their settlements.
10 But they did not drive away the Caʹnaan·ites who were dwelling in Geʹzer, and the Caʹnaan·ites continue to dwell among Eʹphra·im to this day and have been subjected to forced labor.
17 Then the lot fell for the tribe of Ma·nasʹseh, because he was Joseph’s firstborn. Since Maʹchir, the firstborn of Ma·nasʹseh and the father of Gilʹe·ad, was a man of war, he received Gilʹe·ad and Baʹshan.
2 And the lot fell for the rest of the descendants of Ma·nasʹseh according to their families, for the sons of Abi-eʹzer, the sons of Heʹlek, the sons of Asʹri·el, the sons of Sheʹchem, the sons of Heʹpher, and the sons of She·miʹda. These were the descendants of Ma·nasʹseh the son of Joseph, the males according to their families.
3 But Ze·loʹphe·had the son of Heʹpher, the son of Gilʹe·ad, the son of Maʹchir, the son of Ma·nasʹseh, did not have sons, only daughters, and these were the names of his daughters: Mahʹlah, Noah, Hogʹlah, Milʹcah, and Tirʹzah.
4 So they presented themselves before El·e·aʹzar the priest, Joshua the son of Nun, and the chieftains, saying: “It was Jehovah who commanded Moses to give us an inheritance among our brothers.” So at the order of Jehovah, he gave them an inheritance among the brothers of their father.
5 There were also ten allotments that fell to Ma·nasʹseh apart from the land of Gilʹe·ad and Baʹshan, which were on the other side of the Jordan,
6 for the daughters of Ma·nasʹseh received an inheritance along with his sons, and the land of Gilʹe·ad became the property of the rest of the descendants of Ma·nasʹseh.
7 And the boundary of Ma·nasʹseh was from Ashʹer to Mich·meʹthath, which faces Sheʹchem, and the boundary continued toward the south to the land of the inhabitants of En-Tapʹpu·ah.
8 The land of Tapʹpu·ah became Ma·nasʹseh’s, but Tapʹpu·ah on Ma·nasʹseh’s boundary belonged to the descendants of Eʹphra·im.
9 And the boundary went down to the Wadi of Kaʹnah, southward to the wadi. There were cities of Eʹphra·im among the cities of Ma·nasʹseh, and the boundary of Ma·nasʹseh was on the north of the wadi, and it ended at the sea.
10 To the south it belonged to Eʹphra·im, and to the north it belonged to Ma·nasʹseh, and the sea was his boundary, and on the north they reached to Ashʹer, and on the east, to Isʹsa·char.
11 In the territories of Isʹsa·char and Ashʹer, Ma·nasʹseh was given Beth-sheʹan and its dependent towns, Ibʹle·am and its dependent towns, the inhabitants of Dor and its dependent towns, the inhabitants of En-dor and its dependent towns, the inhabitants of Taʹa·nach and its dependent towns, and the inhabitants of Me·gidʹdo and its dependent towns, three of the heights.
12 But the descendants of Ma·nasʹseh were not able to take possession of these cities; the Caʹnaan·ites persisted in dwelling in this land.
13 When the Israelites grew strong, they subjected the Caʹnaan·ites to forced labor, but they did not drive them out entirely.
14 The descendants of Joseph said to Joshua: “Why have you given us as an inheritance only one lot and one allotment? We are a numerous people, for Jehovah has blessed us until now.”
15 Joshua replied to them: “If you are such a numerous people, go up to the forest and clear out a place for yourself there in the land of the Perʹiz·zites and the Rephʹa·im, since the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im is too cramped for you.”
16 Then the descendants of Joseph said: “The mountainous region is not enough for us, and all the Caʹnaan·ites who are dwelling in the land of the valley have war chariots with iron scythes, both those in Beth-sheʹan and its dependent towns and those in the Valley of Jezʹre·el.”
17 So Joshua said this to the house of Joseph, to Eʹphra·im and Ma·nasʹseh: “You are a numerous people, and you have great power. You will not receive only one lot,
18 but the mountainous region will also be yours. Although it is a forest, you will clear it, and it will be the extremity of your territory. For you will drive away the Caʹnaan·ites, even though they are strong and have war chariots with iron scythes.”
20 Then Jehovah said to Joshua:
2 “Tell the Israelites, ‘Select for yourselves the cities of refuge about which I spoke to you through Moses,
3 so that the manslayer who unintentionally or accidentally kills someone may flee there. And they will serve as a refuge for you from the avenger of blood.
4 He must flee to one of these cities and stand at the entrance of the city gate and present his case in the hearing of the elders of that city. Then they must receive him into the city and give him a place and he will live with them.
5 If the avenger of blood chases after him, they should not surrender the manslayer into his hand, for he killed his fellow man accidentally and he did not previously hate him.
6 He must dwell in that city until he stands trial before the assembly and remain there until the death of the high priest who is in office at that time. Then the manslayer may return to the city from which he fled, and he may enter his city and his house.’”
7 So they gave a sacred status to Keʹdesh in Galʹi·lee in the mountainous region of Naphʹta·li, Sheʹchem in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, and Kirʹi·ath-arʹba, that is, Hebʹron, in the mountainous region of Judah.
8 In the region of the Jordan, east of Jerʹi·cho, they selected Beʹzer in the wilderness on the tableland out of the tribe of Reuʹben, Raʹmoth in Gilʹe·ad out of the tribe of Gad, and Goʹlan in Baʹshan out of the tribe of Ma·nasʹseh.
9 These became the cities appointed for all the Israelites and for the foreign residents residing among them, so that anyone who unintentionally killed someone could flee there and not die by the hand of the avenger of blood prior to standing trial before the assembly.
22 Then Joshua summoned the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh
2 and said to them: “You have done all that Moses the servant of Jehovah commanded you, and you have obeyed my voice in all that I commanded you.
3 You have not forsaken your brothers all this time, down to this day; and you have kept the obligation of the commandment of Jehovah your God.
4 Now Jehovah your God has given your brothers rest, just as he promised them. So now you may return to your tents in the land that Moses the servant of Jehovah gave you to possess on the other side of the Jordan.
5 Only be very careful to carry out the commandment and the Law that Moses the servant of Jehovah gave you, by loving Jehovah your God, by walking in all his ways, by keeping his commandments, by sticking to him, and by serving him with all your heart and with all your soul.”
6 Then Joshua blessed them and sent them away, and they went to their tents.
7 And to the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh, Moses had given an inheritance in Baʹshan, and to the other half of the tribe, Joshua gave land on the west side of the Jordan, along with their brothers. Moreover, when Joshua sent them away to their tents, he blessed them
8 and said to them: “Return to your tents with many riches, with very much livestock, with silver and gold, copper and iron, and garments in very great quantity. Take your share of the spoil of your enemies, along with your brothers.”
9 After that the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh departed from the other Israelites, from Shiʹloh in the land of Caʹnaan, and they returned to the land of Gilʹe·ad, the land of their possession where they had settled at the order of Jehovah through Moses.
10 When they came to the regions of the Jordan in the land of Caʹnaan, the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh built an altar there by the Jordan, a large, impressive altar.
11 Later the other Israelites heard about it and said: “Look! The Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh have built an altar on the frontier of the land of Caʹnaan in the regions of the Jordan on the side belonging to the Israelites.”
12 When the Israelites heard about it, the whole assembly of the Israelites congregated at Shiʹloh to go to war against them.
13 Then the Israelites sent Phinʹe·has the son of El·e·aʹzar the priest to the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh in the land of Gilʹe·ad,
14 and ten chieftains were with him, one chieftain of each paternal house of all the tribes of Israel, each a head of his paternal house among the thousands of Israel.
15 When they came to the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh in the land of Gilʹe·ad, they said to them:
16 “This is what all the assembly of Jehovah says: ‘What is this act of unfaithfulness that you have committed against the God of Israel? You have turned back today from following Jehovah by building yourselves an altar and rebelling against Jehovah.
17 Was the error of Peʹor not enough for us? We have not cleansed ourselves from it down to this day, even though a plague came upon the assembly of Jehovah.
18 And you would turn back today from following Jehovah! If you rebel today against Jehovah, then tomorrow he will be indignant against the entire assembly of Israel.
19 Now if it is because the land of your possession is unclean, cross over to the land of Jehovah’s possession where the tabernacle of Jehovah resides and settle among us, but do not rebel against Jehovah, and do not make us rebels by building yourselves an altar in addition to the altar of Jehovah our God.
20 When Aʹchan the son of Zeʹrah committed an act of unfaithfulness regarding what was devoted to destruction, did not indignation come against all the assembly of Israel? And he was not the only man to die for his error.’”
21 At this the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh said in answer to the heads of the thousands of Israel:
22 “The God of gods, Jehovah! The God of gods, Jehovah! He knows, and Israel will also know. If we were rebellious and unfaithful to Jehovah, do not spare us this day.
23 If we built ourselves an altar to turn back from following Jehovah and to offer burnt offerings, grain offerings, and communion sacrifices on it, Jehovah will exact the penalty.
24 No, it was because of another concern that we did this, for we said, ‘In the future, your sons will say to our sons: “What do you have to do with Jehovah the God of Israel?
25 Jehovah has put the Jordan as a boundary between us and you, the Reuʹben·ites and the Gadʹites. You have no share in Jehovah.” And your sons will hinder our sons from worshipping Jehovah.’
26 “So we said, ‘Let us by all means take action by building an altar, not for burnt offerings or sacrifices,
27 but to be a witness between you and us and our descendants after us that we will carry out our service to Jehovah before him with our burnt offerings and our sacrifices and our communion sacrifices, so that your sons may not say to our sons in the future: “You have no share in Jehovah.”’
28 So we said, ‘If they should say that to us and to our descendants in the future, we will then say: “See the replica of Jehovah’s altar that our forefathers made, not for burnt offerings or sacrifices, but to be a witness between you and us.”’
29 It is unthinkable for us to rebel against Jehovah and to turn back today from following Jehovah by building an altar for burnt offerings, grain offerings, and sacrifices, other than the altar of Jehovah our God that is before his tabernacle!”
30 When Phinʹe·has the priest, the chieftains of the assembly, and the heads of the thousands of Israel who were with him heard the words that the descendants of Reuʹben, Gad, and Ma·nasʹseh spoke, they were satisfied.
31 So Phinʹe·has the son of El·e·aʹzar the priest said to the descendants of Reuʹben, Gad, and Ma·nasʹseh: “Today we know that Jehovah is among us, because you have not committed this act of unfaithfulness against Jehovah. Now you have saved the Israelites out of the hand of Jehovah.”
32 Then Phinʹe·has the son of El·e·aʹzar the priest and the chieftains returned from the Reuʹben·ites and the Gadʹites in the land of Gilʹe·ad to the land of Caʹnaan, and they brought back word to the other Israelites.
33 And the Israelites were satisfied with the report. The Israelites then praised God, and they said nothing more about going to war against the Reuʹben·ites and the Gadʹites to destroy the land in which they were dwelling.
34 So the Reuʹben·ites and the Gadʹites named the altar, because “it is a witness between us that Jehovah is the true God.”
23 Many days after Jehovah had given Israel rest from all its surrounding enemies, when Joshua was old and advanced in years,
2 Joshua summoned all Israel, its elders, its heads, its judges, and its officers, and he said to them: “I have grown old; I am advanced in years.
3 And you have seen for yourselves all that Jehovah your God did to all these nations in your behalf because Jehovah your God was the one who was fighting for you.
4 See, I assigned to you by lot the land of the nations that remain as an inheritance for your tribes, as well as that of all the nations that I destroyed, from the Jordan to the Great Sea on the west.
5 And Jehovah your God was the one who kept thrusting them away from before you, and he drove them out for you, and you took possession of their land, just as Jehovah your God promised you.
6 “Now you must be very courageous to observe and carry out all that is written in the book of the Law of Moses by never deviating from it to the right or to the left,
7 by never mingling with these nations that remain with you. You must not even mention the names of their gods nor swear by them, and you must never serve them nor bow down to them.
8 But you must stick to Jehovah your God, just as you have done down to this day.
9 Jehovah will drive away great and mighty nations from before you, for not a man has been able to stand before you to this day.
10 Just one man of you will chase a thousand, because Jehovah your God is fighting for you, just as he promised you.
11 So be on guard constantly by loving Jehovah your God.
12 “But if you should turn back at all and stick to what is left of these nations that remain with you and you form marriage alliances with them and associate with them and they with you,
13 you should know for sure that Jehovah your God will not continue to drive out these nations for you. They will become a trap and a snare and a scourge on your flanks and thorns in your eyes until you have perished from this good land that Jehovah your God has given you.
14 “Now look! I am about to die, and you well know with all your heart and with all your soul that not one word out of all the good promises that Jehovah your God has spoken to you has failed. They have all come true for you. Not one word of them has failed.
15 But just as all the good promises that Jehovah your God has spoken to you have come upon you, so Jehovah will bring upon you all the calamity that he promised and will annihilate you from this good land that Jehovah your God has given you.
16 If you violate the covenant of Jehovah your God that he commanded you to keep and if you go and serve other gods and bow down to them, then Jehovah’s anger will blaze against you and you will quickly perish from the good land that he has given you.”
6 But the Israelites again did what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah, so Jehovah gave them into the hand of Midʹi·an for seven years.
2 The hand of Midʹi·an dominated over Israel. Because of Midʹi·an, the Israelites made hiding places for themselves in the mountains, in the caves, and in the places difficult to approach.
3 If Israel sowed seed, Midʹi·an and Amʹa·lek and the Easterners would attack them.
4 They would camp against them and ruin the produce of the land all the way to Gazʹa, and they left nothing for Israel to eat and no sheep or bull or donkey.
5 For they would come up with their livestock and tents as numerous as the locusts, and they and their camels could not be numbered, and they would come into the land to destroy it.
6 So Israel became greatly impoverished on account of Midʹi·an; and the Israelites called to Jehovah for help.
7 When the Israelites called to Jehovah for help because of Midʹi·an,
8 Jehovah sent to the Israelites a prophet who said to them: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘I brought you up from Egypt and thus brought you out of the house of slavery.
9 So I rescued you from the hand of Egypt and from all your oppressors and drove them out from before you and gave you their land.
10 And I said to you: “I am Jehovah your God. You must not fear the gods of the Amʹor·ites in whose land you are dwelling.” But you did not obey me.’”
11 Later Jehovah’s angel came and sat under the big tree that was in Ophʹrah, which belonged to Joʹash the Abi-ezʹrite. His son Gidʹe·on was beating out wheat in the winepress in order to hide it from Midʹi·an.
12 Jehovah’s angel appeared to him and said: “Jehovah is with you, you mighty warrior.”
13 At this Gidʹe·on said to him: “Pardon me, my lord, but if Jehovah is with us, why has all of this come upon us? Where are all his wonderful acts that our fathers related to us, saying, ‘Did Jehovah not bring us up out of Egypt?’ Now Jehovah has deserted us and given us into Midʹi·an’s hand.”
14 Jehovah faced him and said: “Go with the strength you have, and you will save Israel out of Midʹi·an’s hand. Is it not I who send you?”
15 Gidʹe·on answered him: “Pardon me, Jehovah. How can I save Israel? Look! My clan is the least in Ma·nasʹseh, and I am the most insignificant in my father’s house.”
16 But Jehovah said to him: “Because I will be with you, you will strike down Midʹi·an as if they were one man.”
17 Then he said to him: “If, now, I have found favor in your eyes, show me a sign that you are the one speaking with me.
18 Please do not depart from here until I return with my gift and set it before you.” So he said: “I will stay here until you return.”
19 And Gidʹe·on went in and prepared a young goat and made unleavened bread from an eʹphah of flour. He put the meat in the basket and the broth in the cooking pot; then he brought them out to him and served them under the big tree.
20 The angel of the true God now said to him: “Take the meat and the unleavened bread and place them on the big rock there, and pour out the broth.” And he did so.
21 Then Jehovah’s angel stretched out the tip of the staff that was in his hand and touched the meat and the unleavened bread, and fire flared up from the rock and consumed the meat and the unleavened bread. Jehovah’s angel then vanished from his sight.
22 Gidʹe·on now realized that it was Jehovah’s angel. At once Gidʹe·on said: “Alas, Sovereign Lord Jehovah, for I have seen Jehovah’s angel face-to-face!”
23 But Jehovah said to him: “Peace be with you. Have no fear; you will not die.”
24 So Gidʹe·on built an altar there to Jehovah, and it is called Je·hoʹvah-shaʹlom down to this day. It is still in Ophʹrah of the Abi-ezʹrites.
25 That night Jehovah said to him: “Take the young bull that belongs to your father, the second young bull that is seven years old, and tear down the altar of Baʹal that belongs to your father, and cut down the sacred pole next to it.
26 After you build an altar to Jehovah your God on top of this stronghold with the row of stones, take the second young bull and offer it as a burnt offering on the pieces of wood from the sacred pole that you cut down.”
27 So Gidʹe·on took ten men of his servants and did just as Jehovah told him. But he feared the household of his father and the men of the city too much to do it by day, so he did it at night.
28 When the men of the city got up early the next morning, they saw that the altar of Baʹal had been pulled down and the sacred pole beside it had been cut down and the second young bull had been offered up on the altar that had been built.
29 They asked one another: “Who did this?” After they investigated, they said: “Gidʹe·on the son of Joʹash did this.”
30 So the men of the city said to Joʹash: “Bring your son out that he may die, because he pulled down the altar of Baʹal and cut down the sacred pole next to it.”
31 Joʹash then said to all those who confronted him: “Do you have to defend Baʹal? Do you have to save him? Whoever defends him should be put to death this morning. If he is a god, let him defend himself, since someone pulled down his altar.”
32 And he called Gidʹe·on Jer·ub·baʹal on that day, saying: “Let Baʹal defend himself, for someone has pulled down his altar.”
33 All Midʹi·an and Amʹa·lek and the Easterners joined forces; and they crossed over into the Valley of Jezʹre·el and camped.
34 Then Jehovah’s spirit came upon Gidʹe·on and he sounded the horn, and the Abi-ezʹrites rallied behind him.
35 He sent out messengers through all of Ma·nasʹseh, and they too rallied behind him. He also sent out messengers through Ashʹer, Zebʹu·lun, and Naphʹta·li, and they came up to meet him.
36 Then Gidʹe·on said to the true God: “If you are saving Israel by means of me, just as you have promised,
37 here I am laying a fleece of wool on the threshing floor. If there is dew on the fleece only but all the ground around it is dry, then I will know that you will save Israel by means of me, just as you have promised.”
38 And that is how it happened. When he rose up early the next day and wrung the fleece, he squeezed off enough dew from the fleece to fill a large banquet bowl with water.
39 However, Gidʹe·on said to the true God: “Do not let your anger burn against me, but let me ask just once more. Let me, please, make just one more test with the fleece. Please let the fleece alone be dry while there is dew all over the ground.”
40 So that is what God did that night; only the fleece was dry, and there was dew all over the ground.
1 Now in the days when the judges administered justice, a famine occurred in the land; and a man went from Bethʹle·hem in Judah to reside as a foreigner in the fields of Moʹab, he along with his wife and his two sons.
2 The man’s name was E·limʹe·lech, his wife’s name was Na·oʹmi, and the names of his two sons were Mahʹlon and Chilʹi·on. They were Ephʹrath·ites from Bethʹle·hem in Judah. And they came to the fields of Moʹab and remained there.
3 After some time E·limʹe·lech, Na·oʹmi’s husband, died, and she was left with her two sons.
4 The men later married Moʹab·ite women; one was named Orʹpah, and the other was named Ruth. They remained there for about ten years.
5 Then the two sons, Mahʹlon and Chilʹi·on, also died, and the woman was left without her two children and her husband.
6 So she started out with her daughters-in-law to return from the fields of Moʹab, for she had heard in Moʹab that Jehovah had turned his attention to his people by giving them food.
7 She left the place where she had been living with both of her daughters-in-law. As they were walking on the road to return to the land of Judah,
8 Na·oʹmi said to both of her daughters-in-law: “Go, return, each of you to your mother’s home. May Jehovah show loyal love to you, just as you have shown it to the men who have died and to me.
9 May Jehovah grant that each of you finds security in the home of your husband.” Then she kissed them, and they wept loudly.
10 They kept saying to her: “No, but we will go with you to your people.”
11 But Na·oʹmi said: “Return, my daughters. Why should you go with me? Can I still give birth to sons who could become your husbands?
12 Return, my daughters. Go, for I have grown too old to marry. Even if I could hope to find a husband tonight and could also bear sons,
13 would you keep waiting for them until they could grow up? Would you refrain from getting remarried for their sakes? No, my daughters, I feel very bitter for you, because the hand of Jehovah has turned against me.”
14 Again they wept loudly, after which Orʹpah kissed her mother-in-law and departed. But Ruth stuck with her.
15 So Na·oʹmi said: “Look! Your widowed sister-in-law has returned to her people and her gods. Return with your sister-in-law.”
16 But Ruth said: “Do not plead with me to abandon you, to turn back from accompanying you; for where you go I will go, and where you spend the night, I will spend the night. Your people will be my people, and your God my God.
17 Where you die I will die, and there I will be buried. May Jehovah do so to me and add to it if anything but death should separate me from you.”
18 When Na·oʹmi saw that Ruth insisted on going with her, she stopped trying to convince her.
19 And they both continued on their way until they came to Bethʹle·hem. As soon as they arrived in Bethʹle·hem, the whole city became stirred up over them, and women were saying: “Is this Na·oʹmi?”
20 She would say to the women: “Do not call me Na·oʹmi. Call me Maʹra, for the Almighty has made life very bitter for me.
21 I was full when I went, but Jehovah made me return empty-handed. Why should you call me Na·oʹmi, when it is Jehovah who opposed me and the Almighty who caused me calamity?”
22 This is how Na·oʹmi returned from the fields of Moʹab, along with her Moʹab·ite daughter-in-law Ruth. They came to Bethʹle·hem at the beginning of the barley harvest.
2 Now Na·oʹmi had a relative on her husband’s side who was very wealthy; his name was Boʹaz, and he was of the family of E·limʹe·lech.
2 Ruth the Moʹab·i·tess said to Na·oʹmi: “Let me go out, please, to the fields and glean among the ears of grain behind whoever looks on me with favor.” So Na·oʹmi said to her: “Go, my daughter.”
3 At that she went out and began to glean in the field behind the harvesters. By chance she came upon a plot of land belonging to Boʹaz, who was of the family of E·limʹe·lech.
4 Just then Boʹaz arrived from Bethʹle·hem and said to the harvesters: “Jehovah be with you.” And they replied: “Jehovah bless you.”
5 Boʹaz then asked the young man in charge of the harvesters: “To whom does this young woman belong?”
6 The young man in charge of the harvesters answered: “The young woman is a Moʹab·i·tess who returned with Na·oʹmi from the fields of Moʹab.
7 She asked, ‘Please, may I glean and gather among the cut-off ears of grain left behind by the harvesters?’ And she has been on her feet since she came this morning until just now, when she sat in the shelter for a short rest.”
8 Then Boʹaz said to Ruth: “Listen, my daughter. Do not go away to glean in another field, and do not go anywhere else; stay close by my young women.
9 Keep your eyes on the field that they harvest, and go with them. I have commanded the young men not to touch you. When you are thirsty, go to the water jars and drink from what the young men have drawn.”
10 At that she fell facedown and bowed down to the ground and said to him: “How have I found favor in your eyes, and why have you taken notice of me, when I am a foreigner?”
11 Boʹaz answered her: “A full report was made to me of all you have done for your mother-in-law after the death of your husband and how you left your father and your mother and the land of your relatives to go to a people whom you had not known before.
12 May Jehovah reward you for what you have done, and may there be a perfect wage for you from Jehovah the God of Israel, under whose wings you have come to seek refuge.”
13 To this she said: “Let me find favor in your eyes, my lord, because you have comforted me and spoken reassuringly to your servant, although I am not even one of your servants.”
14 Boʹaz said to her at mealtime: “Come here, eat some of the bread, and dip your piece in the vinegar.” So she sat down beside the harvesters. He then handed her some roasted grain, and she ate and was satisfied, and she had something left over.
15 When she got up to glean, Boʹaz commanded his young men: “Let her glean even among the cut-off ears of grain, and do not mistreat her.
16 You should also be sure to pull out some ears of grain from the bundles for her and leave them behind for her to glean, and do not say anything to stop her.”
17 So she continued to glean in the field until evening. When she beat out what she had gleaned, it came to about an eʹphah of barley.
18 Then she took it and went into the city, and her mother-in-law saw what she had gleaned. Ruth also took out and gave to her the food that was left over after she had eaten her fill.
19 Her mother-in-law then said to her: “Where did you glean today? Where did you work? May the one who took notice of you be blessed.” So she told her mother-in-law about whom she had worked with, saying: “The name of the man I worked with today is Boʹaz.”
20 At that Na·oʹmi said to her daughter-in-law: “May he be blessed by Jehovah, who has not failed in his loyal love toward the living and the dead.” Na·oʹmi continued: “The man is related to us. He is one of our repurchasers.”
21 Then Ruth the Moʹab·i·tess said: “He also told me, ‘Stay close by my young people until they have finished my entire harvest.’”
22 Na·oʹmi said to her daughter-in-law Ruth: “It is better, my daughter, for you to go out with his young women than to be harassed in another field.”
23 So she stayed close to the young women of Boʹaz and gleaned until the barley harvest and the wheat harvest came to an end. And she kept dwelling with her mother-in-law.
3 Na·oʹmi, her mother-in-law, now said to her: “My daughter, should I not look for a home for you, so that it may go well with you?
2 Is not Boʹaz our relative? He is the one whose young women you were with. Tonight he is winnowing barley at the threshing floor.
3 So wash yourself and rub on some perfumed oil; then dress up and go down to the threshing floor. Do not make your presence known to the man until he has finished eating and drinking.
4 When he lies down, take note of the place where he lies down; then go and uncover his feet and lie down. He will tell you what you should do.”
5 At that she replied: “All that you say to me I will do.”
6 So she went down to the threshing floor and did all that her mother-in-law had instructed her to do.
7 Meanwhile, Boʹaz ate and drank and was feeling good at heart. Then he went to lie down at the end of the grain heap. After that she quietly came and uncovered his feet and lay down.
8 At midnight the man began to shiver, and he leaned forward and saw a woman lying at his feet.
9 He said: “Who are you?” She replied: “I am Ruth, your servant. Spread out your garment over your servant, for you are a repurchaser.”
10 At that he said: “May Jehovah bless you, my daughter. You have shown your loyal love more in this last instance than in the first instance, by not going after the young men, whether poor or rich.
11 And now, my daughter, have no fear. I will do for you everything that you say, for everyone in the city knows that you are an excellent woman.
12 While it is true that I am a repurchaser, there is a repurchaser more closely related than I am.
13 Stay here tonight, and if he will repurchase you in the morning, fine! Let him repurchase you. But if he does not want to repurchase you, I will then repurchase you myself, as surely as Jehovah lives. Lie down here until the morning.”
14 So she lay at his feet until the morning and then got up before it was light enough for anyone to be recognized. He then said: “Do not let it be known that a woman came to the threshing floor.”
15 He also said: “Bring the cloak that you are wearing, and hold it out.” So she held it out, and he put six measures of barley in it and put it on her, after which he went into the city.
16 She went her way to her mother-in-law, who now said: “How did it go for you, my daughter?” She told her everything that the man had done for her.
17 She added: “He gave me these six measures of barley and said to me, ‘Do not go empty-handed to your mother-in-law.’”
18 At that she said: “Sit here, my daughter, until you learn how the matter will turn out, for the man will not rest until he settles the matter today.”
4 Now Boʹaz went up to the city gate and sat there. And look! the repurchaser whom Boʹaz had mentioned passed by. At that Boʹaz said: “Come here and sit down, So-and-so.” And he went over and sat down.
2 Then Boʹaz took ten of the city elders and said: “Sit down here.” So they sat down.
3 Boʹaz now said to the repurchaser: “Na·oʹmi, who has returned from the fields of Moʹab, must sell the plot of land that belonged to our brother E·limʹe·lech.
4 So I thought I should disclose it to you and say, ‘Buy it in front of the inhabitants and the elders of my people. If you will repurchase it, repurchase it. But if you will not repurchase it, tell me so that I will know, for you have the claim to repurchase it, and I am next in line after you.’” He replied: “I am willing to repurchase it.”
5 Then Boʹaz said: “On the day you buy the field from Na·oʹmi, you must also buy it from Ruth the Moʹab·i·tess, the wife of the dead man, in order to restore the name of the dead man to his inheritance.”
6 To this the repurchaser said: “I am unable to repurchase it, for I may ruin my own inheritance. Repurchase it for yourself with my right of repurchase, because I am not able to repurchase it.”
7 Now this was the custom of former times in Israel concerning the right of repurchase and exchange to validate every sort of transaction: A man had to remove his sandal and give it to the other party, and this was the manner of confirming an agreement in Israel.
8 So when the repurchaser said to Boʹaz, “Buy it for yourself,” he removed his sandal.
9 Then Boʹaz said to the elders and all the people: “You are witnesses today that I am buying from Na·oʹmi all that belonged to E·limʹe·lech and all that belonged to Chilʹi·on and Mahʹlon.
10 I am also acquiring Ruth the Moʹab·i·tess, the wife of Mahʹlon, as a wife to restore the name of the dead man to his inheritance, so that the name of the dead man will not be cut off from among his brothers and from the city gate of his home. You are witnesses today.”
11 At this all the people who were in the city gate and the elders said: “We are witnesses! May Jehovah grant the wife who is entering your house to be like Rachel and like Leʹah, both of whom built the house of Israel. May you prosper in Ephʹra·thah and make a good name in Bethʹle·hem.
12 May your house become like the house of Peʹrez, whom Taʹmar bore to Judah, through the offspring that Jehovah will give you by this young woman.”
13 So Boʹaz took Ruth and she became his wife. He had relations with her, and Jehovah let her conceive and she gave birth to a son.
14 Then the women said to Na·oʹmi: “Praised be Jehovah, who has not left you without a repurchaser today. May his name be proclaimed in Israel!
15 He has restored your life and will sustain you in your old age, because he has been born to your daughter-in-law, who loves you and is better to you than seven sons.”
16 Na·oʹmi took the child and held him to her bosom, and she cared for him.
17 Then the neighbor women gave him a name. They said, “A son has been born to Na·oʹmi,” and they named him Oʹbed. He is the father of Jesʹse, David’s father.
18 Now this is the family line of Peʹrez: Peʹrez became father to Hezʹron;
19 Hezʹron became father to Ram; Ram became father to Am·minʹa·dab;
20 Am·minʹa·dab became father to Nahʹshon; Nahʹshon became father to Salʹmon;
21 Salʹmon became father to Boʹaz; Boʹaz became father to Oʹbed;
22 Oʹbed became father to Jesʹse; and Jesʹse became father to David.
1 Now there was a man of Ra·math·aʹim-zoʹphim of the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im whose name was El·kaʹnah, the son of Je·roʹham, the son of E·liʹhu, the son of Toʹhu, the son of Zuph, an Eʹphra·im·ite.
2 He had two wives; one was named Hanʹnah, and the other was named Pe·ninʹnah. Pe·ninʹnah had children, but Hanʹnah had no children.
3 That man went up from his city year after year to worship and to sacrifice to Jehovah of armies in Shiʹloh. That is where the two sons of Eʹli, Hophʹni and Phinʹe·has, served as priests to Jehovah.
4 One day when El·kaʹnah offered a sacrifice, he gave portions to his wife Pe·ninʹnah as well as to all her sons and her daughters,
5 but to Hanʹnah he gave a special portion, because Hanʹnah was the one he loved; but Jehovah had not given her children.
6 Moreover, her rival wife taunted her relentlessly in order to upset her because Jehovah had not given her children.
7 That is what she would do year after year; whenever Hanʹnah went up to the house of Jehovah, her rival would taunt her so much that she would weep and not eat.
8 But her husband El·kaʹnah said to her: “Hanʹnah, why do you weep, and why do you not eat, and why are you so sad? Am I not better to you than ten sons?”
9 Then Hanʹnah got up after they had finished eating and drinking in Shiʹloh. At the time, Eʹli the priest was sitting on the seat by the doorpost of the temple of Jehovah.
10 Hanʹnah was extremely bitter, and she began to pray to Jehovah and to weep uncontrollably.
11 And she made this vow: “O Jehovah of armies, if you look upon the affliction of your servant and remember me and you do not forget your servant and give to your servant a male child, I will give him to Jehovah all the days of his life, and no razor will touch his head.”
12 While she prayed for a long time before Jehovah, Eʹli was watching her mouth.
13 Hanʹnah was speaking in her heart, only her lips were trembling, but her voice was not heard. So Eʹli thought she was drunk.
14 Eʹli said to her: “How long will you stay drunk? Stop drinking your wine.”
15 At this Hanʹnah answered: “No, my lord! I am a woman under great stress; I have not drunk wine or anything alcoholic, but I am pouring out my soul before Jehovah.
16 Do not take your servant for a worthless woman, for I have been speaking until now out of my great anguish and distress.”
17 Then Eʹli answered: “Go in peace, and may the God of Israel grant your petition that you have asked of him.”
18 To this she said: “Let your servant find favor in your eyes.” And the woman went on her way and ate, and her face was no longer downcast.
19 Then they got up early in the morning and bowed before Jehovah, after which they returned to their house in Raʹmah. El·kaʹnah had sexual relations with his wife Hanʹnah, and Jehovah gave attention to her.
20 Within a year Hanʹnah became pregnant and gave birth to a son and named him Samuel, because, as she said, “it is from Jehovah that I have asked him.”
21 In time El·kaʹnah went up with all his household to offer the yearly sacrifice to Jehovah and to present his vow offering.
22 But Hanʹnah did not go up, for she said to her husband: “As soon as the boy is weaned, I will bring him; then he will appear before Jehovah and remain there from then on.”
23 El·kaʹnah her husband then said to her: “Do what you think is best. Stay at home until you wean him. May Jehovah carry out what you have said.” So the woman stayed at home and nursed her son until she weaned him.
24 As soon as she had weaned him, she took him up to Shiʹloh, along with a three-year-old bull, one eʹphah of flour, and a large jar of wine, and she came to the house of Jehovah in Shiʹloh and brought the young boy with her.
25 Then they slaughtered the bull and brought the boy to Eʹli.
26 With that she said: “Pardon me, my lord! As surely as you live, my lord, I am the woman who was standing with you in this place to pray to Jehovah.
27 It was for this boy that I prayed, and Jehovah granted my petition that I asked of him.
28 I, in turn, now lend him to Jehovah. For all his days, he is lent to Jehovah.” And he bowed down there to Jehovah.
2 Then Hanʹnah said in prayer: “My heart rejoices in Jehovah; My horn is exalted by Jehovah. My mouth is opened wide against my enemies, For I rejoice in your acts of salvation.
2 There is no one holy like Jehovah, There is no one but you, And there is no rock like our God.
3 Do not keep speaking with haughtiness; Let nothing arrogant come from your mouth, For Jehovah is a God of knowledge, And by him deeds are rightly evaluated.
4 The bows of mighty men are shattered, But those who are stumbling are given strength.
5 The well-fed must hire themselves out for bread, But the hungry hunger no more. The barren has given birth to seven, But she who had many sons has become desolate.
6 Jehovah kills, and he preserves life; He brings down to the Grave, and he raises up.
7 Jehovah impoverishes, and he enriches; He abases, and he exalts.
8 He raises the lowly one from the dust; He lifts up the poor from the ash heap, To make them sit with princes, Giving them a seat of honor. To Jehovah belong earth’s supports, And he places the productive land upon them.
9 He guards the steps of his loyal ones, But the wicked will be silenced in darkness, For not by power does a man prevail.
10 Jehovah will shatter those fighting against him; He will thunder against them from the heavens. Jehovah will judge to the ends of the earth, He will give power to his king And exalt the horn of his anointed one.”
11 Then El·kaʹnah went to his house in Raʹmah, but the boy became a minister of Jehovah before Eʹli the priest.
12 Now the sons of Eʹli were wicked men; they had no regard for Jehovah.
13 This is what they did with the due right of the priests from the people: Whenever any man was offering a sacrifice, an attendant of the priest came with a three-pronged fork in his hand when the meat was boiling,
14 and he would thrust it into the basin, the two-handled cooking pot, the cauldron, or the one-handled cooking pot. Whatever the fork brought up, the priest would take for himself. That is what they would do in Shiʹloh to all the Israelites coming there.
15 Also, even before the man sacrificing could make the fat smoke, an attendant of the priest would come and say to him: “Give the priest meat to roast. He will not take boiled meat from you, only raw meat.”
16 When the man would say to him: “Let them first be sure to make the fat smoke, then take for yourself whatever you desire,” he would say: “No, give it to me now; if not, I will take it by force!”
17 Thus the sin of the attendants came to be very great before Jehovah, for the men treated the offering of Jehovah with disrespect.
18 Now Samuel was ministering before Jehovah, wearing a linen ephʹod, though he was just a boy.
19 Also, his mother would make for him a little sleeveless coat, and she brought it up to him year after year when she came up with her husband to offer the yearly sacrifice.
20 And Eʹli blessed El·kaʹnah and his wife and said: “May Jehovah grant you a child from this wife in place of the one who was lent to Jehovah.” And they went back home.
21 Jehovah turned his attention to Hanʹnah, so that she could conceive; and she gave birth to three more sons and two daughters. And the boy Samuel continued growing up before Jehovah.
22 Now Eʹli was very old, but he had heard about everything that his sons were doing to all Israel and how they would lie down with the women who served at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
23 He used to say to them: “Why do you keep doing things like these? For the things I am hearing about you from all the people are bad.
24 No, my sons, the report that I hear circulating among the people of Jehovah is not good.
25 If a man should sin against another man, someone may appeal to Jehovah for him; but if a man should sin against Jehovah, who can pray for him?” But they refused to listen to their father, for Jehovah had determined to put them to death.
26 Meanwhile, the boy Samuel kept growing in stature and in favor both with Jehovah and with the people.
27 A man of God came to Eʹli and said to him: “This is what Jehovah says: ‘Did I not plainly reveal myself to your father’s house while they were in Egypt as slaves to the house of Pharʹaoh?
28 And he was chosen out of all the tribes of Israel to serve as my priest and to go up on my altar to make sacrifices, to offer incense, and to bear an ephʹod before me; and I gave to the house of your forefather all the offerings made by fire of the Israelites.
29 Why do you men scorn my sacrifice and my offering that I have commanded in my place of dwelling? Why do you keep honoring your sons more than me by fattening yourselves from the best portions of every offering of my people Israel?
30 “‘That is why the word of Jehovah the God of Israel is: “I did indeed say that your house and the house of your forefather would always walk before me.” But now Jehovah declares: “It is unthinkable, on my part, because those honoring me I will honor, but those despising me will be treated with contempt.”
31 Look! Days are coming when I will cut off your strength and that of your father’s house, so that no man in your house will live to old age.
32 And you will look upon a rival in my dwelling amid all the good that is done to Israel, and never again will there be an old man in your house.
33 The man of yours whom I do not cut off from serving at my altar will cause your eyes to fail and will bring you grief, but the greater number of your house will die by the sword of men.
34 And what happens to your two sons, Hophʹni and Phinʹe·has, will be the sign for you: On one day both of them will die.
35 Then I will raise up for myself a faithful priest. He will act in harmony with what is my heart’s desire; and I will build for him a lasting house, and he will walk before my anointed one always.
36 Anyone who remains in your house will come and bow down to him for the payment of money and a loaf of bread, and will say: “Assign me, please, to one of the priestly offices to eat a piece of bread.”’”
3 Meanwhile, the boy Samuel was ministering to Jehovah before Eʹli, but word from Jehovah had become rare in those days; visions were not widespread.
2 One day Eʹli was lying down in his usual place, and his eyes had grown dim; he was not able to see.
3 The lamp of God had not yet been extinguished, and Samuel was lying in the temple of Jehovah, where the Ark of God was.
4 Jehovah then called Samuel. He answered: “Here I am.”
5 He ran to Eʹli and said: “Here I am, for you called me.” But he said: “I did not call. Lie down again.” So he went and lay down.
6 Jehovah called once again: “Samuel!” At this Samuel got up and went to Eʹli and said: “Here I am, for you called me.” But he said: “I did not call, my son. Lie down again.”
7 (Now Samuel had not yet come to know Jehovah, and the word of Jehovah had not yet been revealed to him.)
8 So Jehovah called again, a third time: “Samuel!” At that he got up and went to Eʹli and said: “Here I am, for you called me.” Eʹli then realized that it was Jehovah who was calling the boy.
9 So Eʹli said to Samuel: “Go, lie down, and if he calls you, you should say, ‘Speak, Jehovah, for your servant is listening.’” And Samuel went and lay down in his place.
10 Jehovah came and stood there, and he called as at the other times: “Samuel, Samuel!” At this Samuel said: “Speak, for your servant is listening.”
11 Jehovah said to Samuel: “Look! I am doing something in Israel that will make both ears of anyone who hears about it tingle.
12 On that day I will carry out toward Eʹli all that I said about his house, from start to finish.
13 You must tell him that I am bringing a lasting judgment on his house for the error that he has known about, for his sons are cursing God, but he has not rebuked them.
14 That is why I have sworn to the house of Eʹli that the error of the house of Eʹli will never be atoned for by sacrifices or by offerings.”
15 Samuel lay down until the morning; then he opened the doors of Jehovah’s house. Samuel was afraid to tell Eʹli of the vision.
16 But Eʹli called for Samuel: “Samuel, my son!” At this he said: “Here I am.”
17 He asked: “What message did he speak to you? Please, do not hide it from me. May God do so to you and add to it if you hide from me a single word of all that he said to you.”
18 So Samuel told him everything, and he did not hide anything from him. Eʹli said: “It is Jehovah. Let him do what is good in his eyes.”
19 Samuel continued growing up, and Jehovah himself was with him and did not let any of all his words go unfulfilled.
20 All Israel from Dan to Beʹer-sheʹba became aware that Samuel had been confirmed as Jehovah’s prophet.
21 And Jehovah continued to appear in Shiʹloh, for Jehovah revealed himself to Samuel in Shiʹloh by the word of Jehovah.
5 When the Phi·lisʹtines captured the Ark of the true God, they brought it from Eb·en·eʹzer to Ashʹdod.
2 The Phi·lisʹtines took the Ark of the true God and brought it into the house of Daʹgon and set it beside Daʹgon.
3 When the Ashʹdod·ites got up early the next day, there was Daʹgon fallen facedown on the ground before the Ark of Jehovah. So they took Daʹgon and returned him to his place.
4 When they got up early in the morning on the following day, there was Daʹgon fallen facedown on the ground before the Ark of Jehovah. The head of Daʹgon and the palms of both his hands were cut off and were lying on the threshold. Only the fish part had been left intact.
5 That is why to this day, the priests of Daʹgon and all those who enter the house of Daʹgon do not walk on the threshold of Daʹgon in Ashʹdod.
6 The hand of Jehovah was heavy against the Ashʹdod·ites, and he devastated them by striking Ashʹdod and its territories with piles.
7 When the men of Ashʹdod saw what was happening, they said: “Do not let the Ark of the God of Israel remain with us, for his hand has dealt harshly with us and our god Daʹgon.”
8 So they sent for and gathered all the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines and asked them: “What should we do with the Ark of the God of Israel?” They replied: “Let the Ark of the God of Israel be moved to Gath.” So they moved the Ark of the God of Israel there.
9 After they moved it there, the hand of Jehovah came against the city, bringing great panic. He struck the men of the city, from small to great, and piles broke out on them.
10 So they sent the Ark of the true God to Ekʹron, but as soon as the Ark of the true God came to Ekʹron, the Ekʹron·ites began to cry out: “They have brought the Ark of the God of Israel to us to put us and our people to death!”
11 Then they sent for and gathered all the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines and said: “Send the Ark of the God of Israel away; let it return to its place so that we and our people may not be put to death.” For the terror of death had spread through the whole city; the hand of the true God had been very heavy there,
12 and the men who did not die had been struck with piles. And the city’s cry for help ascended to the heavens.
6 The Ark of Jehovah was in Phi·lisʹtine territory for seven months.
2 The Phi·lisʹtines called the priests and the diviners and asked: “What should we do with the Ark of Jehovah? Let us know how we should send it back to its place.”
3 They replied: “If you send the ark of the covenant of Jehovah the God of Israel away, do not send it back without an offering. You should by all means return to him a guilt offering. Only then will you be healed, and it will be made known to you why his hand has not turned away from you.”
4 So they asked: “What guilt offering should we send to him?” They said: “According to the number of the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines, send five golden piles and five golden mice, for the same scourge has afflicted every one of you and your lords.
5 You should make images of your piles and images of your mice that are bringing the land to ruin, and you should honor the God of Israel. Perhaps he will lighten the weight of his hand that is on you and your god and your land.
6 Why should you harden your heart as Egypt and Pharʹaoh hardened their hearts? When He dealt harshly with them, they had to send Israel away, and they departed.
7 Now prepare a new wagon and two cows that have calves and have never been under a yoke. Then hitch the cows to the wagon, but take their calves back home, away from them.
8 Take the Ark of Jehovah and place it on the wagon, and put the golden articles that you are sending to him as a guilt offering in a box next to it. Then send it on its way
9 and watch: If it goes up the road to Beth-sheʹmesh, to its own territory, then he is the one who has done this great evil to us. But if not, we will know that it was not his hand that struck us; it happened to us by coincidence.”
10 The men did accordingly. They took two cows that had calves and hitched them to the wagon, and the calves they penned up at home.
11 Then they put the Ark of Jehovah on the wagon, as well as the box containing the golden mice and the images of their piles.
12 And the cows went straight ahead on the road to Beth-sheʹmesh. They stayed on the one highway, mooing as they went; they did not turn either to the right or to the left. All the while the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines were walking behind them as far as the boundary of Beth-sheʹmesh.
13 The people of Beth-sheʹmesh were reaping the wheat harvest in the valley plain. When they raised their eyes and saw the Ark, they were overjoyed at seeing it.
14 The wagon came into the field of Joshua the Beth-sheʹmite and stopped there near a large stone. So they chopped up the wood of the wagon, and they offered the cows as a burnt offering to Jehovah.
15 The Levites took down the Ark of Jehovah and the box that was with it, which contained the golden articles, and they put them on the large stone. The men of Beth-sheʹmesh offered up burnt offerings and made sacrifices on that day to Jehovah.
16 When the five lords of the Phi·lisʹtines saw it, they returned to Ekʹron on that day.
17 Now these are the golden piles that the Phi·lisʹtines sent as a guilt offering to Jehovah: one for Ashʹdod, one for Gazʹa, one for Ashʹke·lon, one for Gath, one for Ekʹron.
18 And the number of the golden mice corresponded to the number of all the cities of the Phi·lisʹtines that belonged to the five lords—both the fortified cities and the villages in the open country. And the large stone upon which they rested the Ark of Jehovah serves as a witness down to this day in the field of Joshua the Beth-sheʹmite.
19 But God struck down the men of Beth-sheʹmesh, because they had looked upon the Ark of Jehovah. He struck down 50,070 among the people, and the people began mourning because Jehovah had struck them down with a great slaughter.
20 So the men of Beth-sheʹmesh asked: “Who will be able to stand before Jehovah, this holy God, and to whom will he go away from us?”
21 So they sent messengers to the inhabitants of Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, saying: “The Phi·lisʹtines have returned the Ark of Jehovah. Come down and take it up with you.”
8 When Samuel had grown old, he appointed his sons as judges for Israel.
2 The name of his firstborn son was Joel, and the name of his second, A·biʹjah; they were judges in Beʹer-sheʹba.
3 But his sons did not walk in his ways; they were inclined to pursue dishonest profit, they accepted bribes, and they perverted justice.
4 In time all the elders of Israel gathered together and came to Samuel at Raʹmah.
5 They said to him: “Look! You have grown old, but your sons are not walking in your ways. Now appoint for us a king to judge us like all the other nations.”
6 But it displeased Samuel when they said: “Give us a king to judge us.” Then Samuel prayed to Jehovah,
7 and Jehovah said to Samuel: “Listen to everything the people say to you; for it is not you whom they have rejected, but it is I whom they have rejected as their king.
8 They are doing just as they have done from the day I brought them up out of Egypt until this day; they keep forsaking me and serving other gods, and that is what they are doing to you.
9 Now listen to them. However, you should solemnly warn them; tell them what the king who rules over them will have the right to demand.”
10 So Samuel told the people who were asking him for a king all the words of Jehovah.
11 He said: “This is what the king who rules over you will have the right to demand: He will take your sons and put them in his chariots and make them his horsemen, and some will have to run before his chariots.
12 And he will appoint for himself chiefs over thousands and chiefs over fifties, and some will do his plowing, reap his harvest, and make his weapons of war and equipment for his chariots.
13 He will take your daughters to be ointment mixers, cooks, and bakers.
14 He will take the best of your fields, your vineyards, and your olive groves, and he will give them to his servants.
15 He will take the tenth of your grainfields and your vineyards, and he will give it to his court officials and his servants.
16 And he will take your male and female servants, your best herds, and your donkeys, and he will use them for his work.
17 He will take the tenth of your flocks, and you will become his servants.
18 The day will come when you will cry out because of the king you have chosen for yourselves, but Jehovah will not answer you in that day.”
19 However, the people refused to listen to what Samuel told them, and they said: “No, we are determined to have a king over us.
20 Then we will be like all the other nations, and our king will judge us and lead us and fight our battles.”
21 After Samuel heard all the words of the people, he repeated them in the hearing of Jehovah.
22 Jehovah said to Samuel: “Listen to them, and appoint a king to reign over them.” Samuel then said to the men of Israel: “Each of you should return to his city.”
10 Samuel then took the flask of oil and poured it out on Saul’s head. He kissed him and said: “Has not Jehovah anointed you as a leader over his inheritance?
2 When you leave me today, you will find two men near the tomb of Rachel in the territory of Benjamin at Zelʹzah, and they will say to you, ‘The donkeys that you went to look for have been found, but now your father has forgotten about the donkeys and is worried about you. He is saying: “What should I do about my son?”’
3 Go on from there until you come to the big tree of Taʹbor, where you will meet three men going up to the true God at Bethʹel, one carrying three young goats, one carrying three loaves of bread, and one carrying a large jar of wine.
4 They will ask about your welfare and give you two loaves, and you must accept the loaves from them.
5 After that you will come to the hill of the true God, where there is a garrison of the Phi·lisʹtines. When you come to the city, you will meet a group of prophets coming down from the high place, and a stringed instrument and tambourine and flute and harp will be played ahead of them while they are prophesying.
6 The spirit of Jehovah will empower you, and you will prophesy along with them and be changed into a different person.
7 When these signs have taken place, do whatever your hand finds possible, because the true God is with you.
8 Then go down ahead of me to Gilʹgal, and I will go down to you there to offer up burnt sacrifices and communion sacrifices. You should wait for seven days until I come to you. Then I will let you know what you should do.”
9 As soon as Saul turned around to leave Samuel, God began changing his heart to be like that of someone else, and all these signs came true on that day.
10 So they went from there to the hill, and a group of prophets met him. At once the spirit of God empowered him, and he began to prophesy among them.
11 When all those who previously knew him saw him prophesying with the prophets, they said to one another: “What has happened to the son of Kish? Is Saul also among the prophets?”
12 Then a man from there said: “But who is their father?” So it became a saying: “Is Saul also among the prophets?”
13 When he finished prophesying, he came to the high place.
14 The brother of Saul’s father later said to him and to his attendant: “Where did you go?” At that he said: “To look for the donkeys, but we saw that they were not there, so we went to Samuel.”
15 Saul’s uncle asked: “Please tell me, what did Samuel say to you?”
16 Saul replied to his uncle: “He told us that the donkeys had already been found.” But Saul did not tell him what Samuel said about the matter of the kingship.
17 Samuel then called the people together to Jehovah at Mizʹpah
18 and said to the Israelites: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: ‘It was I who brought Israel up out of Egypt and who rescued you from the hand of Egypt and from the hand of all the kingdoms that were oppressing you.
19 But today you have rejected your God who was your Savior out of all your evils and distresses, and you said: “No, you should appoint a king over us.” Now take your stand before Jehovah by your tribes and by your thousands.’”
20 So Samuel had all the tribes of Israel draw near, and the tribe of Benjamin was selected.
21 Then he had the tribe of Benjamin draw near by its families, and the family of the Matʹrites was selected. Finally Saul the son of Kish was selected. But when they went to look for him, he was nowhere to be found.
22 So they inquired of Jehovah: “Has the man come here yet?” Jehovah answered: “There he is hiding himself among the luggage.”
23 So they ran and brought him from there. When he stood in the middle of the people, he was head and shoulders taller than all the other people.
24 Samuel said to all the people: “Do you see the one whom Jehovah has chosen, that there is none like him among all the people?” And all the people began to shout: “Long live the king!”
25 Samuel spoke to the people about the rightful due of kings and wrote it in a book and deposited it before Jehovah. Then Samuel sent all the people away, everyone to his house.
26 Saul also went to his home in Gibʹe·ah, accompanied by the warriors whose hearts Jehovah had touched.
27 But some worthless men said: “How will this one save us?” So they despised him, and they did not bring any gift to him. But he said nothing about it.
11 Then Naʹhash the Amʹmon·ite came up and camped against Jaʹbesh in Gilʹe·ad. All the men of Jaʹbesh said to Naʹhash: “Make a covenant with us, and we will serve you.”
2 Naʹhash the Amʹmon·ite said to them: “I will make it with you on this condition: that all your right eyes be bored out. I will do this to humiliate all Israel.”
3 The elders of Jaʹbesh replied to him: “Give us seven days’ time so that we can send messengers into all the territory of Israel. Then, if there is no one to rescue us, we will surrender to you.”
4 In time the messengers came to Gibʹe·ah of Saul and spoke these words in the hearing of the people, and all the people wept at the top of their voice.
5 But Saul was coming from the field behind the herd, and Saul said: “What is the matter with the people? Why are they weeping?” So they related to him the words of the men of Jaʹbesh.
6 The spirit of God empowered Saul when he heard these words, and he burned with anger.
7 So he took a pair of bulls and cut them into pieces, and he sent these into all the territory of Israel by the hand of the messengers, who said: “Whoever does not follow Saul and Samuel should expect this to be done to his cattle!” And the fear of Jehovah fell upon the people, so that they came out with one accord.
8 Then he counted them in Beʹzek, and there were 300,000 Israelites and 30,000 men of Judah.
9 They now said to the messengers who had come: “This is what you should say to the men of Jaʹbesh in Gilʹe·ad, ‘Tomorrow when the sun gets hot, you will be saved.’” With that the messengers came and told the men of Jaʹbesh, and they were overjoyed.
10 So the men of Jaʹbesh said: “Tomorrow we will surrender to you, and you may do to us whatever seems good to you.”
11 On the next day, Saul divided the people into three bands, and they made their way into the middle of the camp during the morning watch and struck down the Amʹmon·ites until the day grew hot. Those who survived were scattered, so that no two of them were left together.
12 Then the people said to Samuel: “Who was saying, ‘Is Saul to be king over us?’ Hand the men over, and we will put them to death.”
13 However, Saul said: “Not a man should be put to death on this day, for today Jehovah has rescued Israel.”
14 Samuel later said to the people: “Come and let us go to Gilʹgal to reconfirm the kingship.”
15 So all the people went to Gilʹgal, and in Gilʹgal they made Saul king before Jehovah. Then they offered communion sacrifices there before Jehovah, and Saul and all the men of Israel celebrated with great joy.
12 Finally Samuel said to all Israel: “Here I have done all that you asked of me, and I appointed a king to reign over you.
2 Now here is the king who is leading you! As for me, I have grown old and gray, and my sons are here with you, and I have led you from my youth until this day.
3 Here I am. Testify against me before Jehovah and before his anointed one: Whose bull or whose donkey have I taken? Or whom have I defrauded or crushed? From whose hand have I accepted a bribe to make me look the other way? If I have, I will restore it to you.”
4 To this they said: “You have not defrauded us or crushed us or accepted anything at all from anyone’s hand.”
5 So he said to them: “Jehovah is a witness against you, and his anointed one is a witness this day that you have found nothing to accuse me of.” To this they said: “He is a witness.”
6 So Samuel said to the people: “Jehovah, who used Moses and Aaron and who brought your forefathers up out of the land of Egypt, is a witness.
7 And now take your positions, and I will judge you before Jehovah in view of all the righteous acts that Jehovah has done for you and for your forefathers.
8 “As soon as Jacob had come into Egypt and your forefathers began calling to Jehovah for help, Jehovah sent Moses and Aaron to lead your forefathers out of Egypt and to cause them to dwell in this place.
9 But they forgot Jehovah their God, and he sold them into the hand of Sisʹe·ra the chief of the army of Haʹzor and into the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines and into the hand of the king of Moʹab, and they fought against them.
10 And they called to Jehovah for help and said, ‘We have sinned, for we have left Jehovah to serve the Baʹals and the Ashʹto·reth images; now rescue us out of the hand of our enemies so that we may serve you.’
11 Then Jehovah sent Jer·ub·baʹal and Beʹdan and Jephʹthah and Samuel and rescued you from the hand of the enemies all around you, so that you could live in security.
12 When you saw that Naʹhash, the king of the Amʹmon·ites, had come against you, you kept saying to me, ‘No, we are determined to have a king over us!’ even though Jehovah your God is your King.
13 Now here is the king whom you have chosen, the one you asked for. Look! Jehovah has appointed a king over you.
14 If you fear Jehovah and serve him and obey his voice and you do not rebel against the order of Jehovah, and both you and the king who reigns over you follow Jehovah your God, fine.
15 But if you do not obey the voice of Jehovah and you rebel against the order of Jehovah, the hand of Jehovah will be against you and your fathers.
16 Now take your positions and see this great thing that Jehovah is doing before your eyes.
17 Is it not the wheat harvest today? I will call on Jehovah to make it thunder and rain; then know and understand what an evil thing you have done in the eyes of Jehovah in asking for a king for yourselves.”
18 At that Samuel called to Jehovah, and Jehovah made it thunder and rain on that day, so that all the people were greatly in fear of Jehovah and of Samuel.
19 And all the people said to Samuel: “Pray to Jehovah your God for your servants, as we do not want to die, for we have added to all our sins another evil by asking for a king.”
20 So Samuel said to the people: “Do not be afraid. You have indeed done all this evil. Only do not turn away from following Jehovah, and serve Jehovah with all your heart.
21 Do not turn away to follow the empty things, which are of no benefit and cannot rescue, because they are empty.
22 For the sake of his great name, Jehovah will not abandon his people, for Jehovah has taken it upon himself to make you his people.
23 As for me, it is unthinkable for me to sin against Jehovah by ceasing to pray in your behalf, and I will continue to instruct you in the good and right way.
24 Only fear Jehovah, and serve him faithfully with all your heart, for see what great things he has done for you.
25 But if you flagrantly do what is bad, you will be swept away, both you and your king.”
15 Then Samuel said to Saul: “Jehovah sent me to anoint you as king over his people Israel; now listen to what Jehovah has to say.
2 This is what Jehovah of armies says: ‘I will call to account the A·malʹek·ites for what they did to Israel when they opposed them along their way coming up from Egypt.
3 Now go, and strike down the A·malʹek·ites, and devote them to destruction along with all that they have. You must not spare them; you are to put them to death, man as well as woman, child as well as infant, bull as well as sheep, camel as well as donkey.’”
4 Saul summoned the people and counted them in Te·laʹim: There were 200,000 foot soldiers and 10,000 men of Judah.
5 Saul advanced as far as the city of Amʹa·lek and set an ambush by the valley.
6 Saul then said to the Kenʹites: “Go, depart from among the A·malʹek·ites, so that I do not sweep you away with them. For you showed loyal love to all the people of Israel at the time they came up out of Egypt.” So the Kenʹites departed from the midst of Amʹa·lek.
7 After that Saul struck down the A·malʹek·ites from Havʹi·lah as far as Shur, which is next to Egypt.
8 He caught Aʹgag the king of Amʹa·lek alive, but all the other people he devoted to destruction with the sword.
9 However, Saul and the people spared Aʹgag and the best of the flock, the herd, the fattened animals, the rams, and all that was good. They did not want to devote them to destruction. But all the goods that were worthless and unwanted, these they devoted to destruction.
10 Then the word of Jehovah came to Samuel:
11 “I regret that I have made Saul king, for he has turned away from following me and he has not carried out my words.” Samuel became very upset, and he kept crying out to Jehovah all night long.
12 When Samuel got up early in the morning to meet Saul, Samuel was told: “Saul went to Carʹmel, and there he erected a monument for himself. Then he turned around and went down to Gilʹgal.”
13 When Samuel finally came to him, Saul said to him: “May Jehovah bless you. I have carried out the word of Jehovah.”
14 But Samuel said: “Then what is this sound of the flock in my ears and the sound of the cattle that I hear?”
15 To this Saul said: “They were brought from the A·malʹek·ites, because the people spared the best of the flock and the herd for sacrificing them to Jehovah your God; but what was left we devoted to destruction.”
16 At this Samuel said to Saul: “Stop! Let me tell you what Jehovah said to me last night.” So he said to him: “Speak!”
17 Samuel continued: “Were you not insignificant in your own eyes when you were made head of the tribes of Israel and when Jehovah anointed you as king over Israel?
18 Jehovah later sent you on a mission and said, ‘Go, and devote the sinful A·malʹek·ites to destruction. Fight against them until you have exterminated them.’
19 So why did you not obey the voice of Jehovah? Instead, you rushed greedily toward the spoil and did what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah!”
20 However, Saul said to Samuel: “But I have obeyed the voice of Jehovah! I went on the mission to which Jehovah sent me, and I brought back Aʹgag the king of Amʹa·lek, and I devoted the A·malʹek·ites to destruction.
21 But the people took sheep and cattle from the spoil, the best of what was devoted to destruction, to sacrifice to Jehovah your God at Gilʹgal.”
22 Samuel then said: “Does Jehovah take as much pleasure in burnt offerings and sacrifices as in obeying the voice of Jehovah? Look! To obey is better than a sacrifice, and to pay attention than the fat of rams;
23 for rebelliousness is the same as the sin of divination, and pushing ahead presumptuously the same as using magical power and idolatry. Because you have rejected the word of Jehovah, he has rejected you from being king.”
24 Then Saul said to Samuel: “I have sinned, for I have overstepped the order of Jehovah and your words, because I feared the people and listened to what they said.
25 And now, please, pardon my sin, and return with me so that I may bow down to Jehovah.”
26 But Samuel said to Saul: “I will not return with you, for you have rejected the word of Jehovah, and Jehovah has rejected you from continuing as king over Israel.”
27 As Samuel was turning to go, Saul grabbed hold of the hem of his sleeveless coat, but it ripped away.
28 At this Samuel said to him: “Jehovah has ripped away the royal rule of Israel from you today, and he will give it to one of your fellow men who is better than you.
29 Moreover, the Excellency of Israel will not prove false or change his mind, for He is not a mere man that he should change his mind.”
30 At this he said: “I have sinned. But honor me, please, in front of the elders of my people and in front of Israel. Return with me, and I will bow down to Jehovah your God.”
31 So Samuel returned behind Saul, and Saul bowed down to Jehovah.
32 And Samuel said: “Bring Aʹgag the king of Amʹa·lek near to me.” Then Aʹgag went to him reluctantly, for Aʹgag had been saying to himself: ‘Surely the threat of death is past.’
33 However, Samuel said: “Just as your sword has bereaved women of children, so your mother will be most bereaved among women.” With that Samuel hacked Aʹgag to pieces before Jehovah at Gilʹgal.
34 Samuel now went to Raʹmah, and Saul went up to his own house at Gibʹe·ah of Saul.
35 Samuel did not see Saul again until the day of his death, for Samuel went into mourning for Saul. And Jehovah regretted that he had made Saul king over Israel.
16 Jehovah eventually said to Samuel: “How long will you mourn for Saul now that I have rejected him from ruling as king over Israel? Fill your horn with oil and go. I will send you to Jesʹse the Bethʹle·hem·ite, because I have selected from among his sons a king for myself.”
2 But Samuel said: “How can I go? When Saul hears about it, he will kill me.” Jehovah replied: “Take a young cow with you and say, ‘I have come to sacrifice to Jehovah.’
3 Invite Jesʹse to the sacrifice; then I will make known to you what to do. You must anoint for me the one whom I designate to you.”
4 Samuel did what Jehovah said. When he came to Bethʹle·hem, the elders of the city were trembling at meeting him, and they said: “Does your coming mean peace?”
5 To this he said: “It means peace. I have come to sacrifice to Jehovah. Sanctify yourselves, and come with me to the sacrifice.” Then he sanctified Jesʹse and his sons, after which he summoned them to the sacrifice.
6 As they came in and he saw E·liʹab, he said: “Surely here before Jehovah stands his anointed one.”
7 But Jehovah said to Samuel: “Do not pay attention to his appearance and how tall he is, for I have rejected him. For the way man sees is not the way God sees, because mere man sees what appears to the eyes, but Jehovah sees into the heart.”
8 Then Jesʹse called A·binʹa·dab and had him pass before Samuel, but he said: “Jehovah has not chosen this one either.”
9 Next Jesʹse presented Shamʹmah, but he said: “Jehovah has not chosen this one either.”
10 So Jesʹse had seven of his sons pass before Samuel, but Samuel said to Jesʹse: “Jehovah has not chosen any of these.”
11 Finally Samuel said to Jesʹse: “Are these all of your boys?” To this he said: “The youngest has been left out until now; he is pasturing the sheep.” Then Samuel said to Jesʹse: “Send for him, because we will not sit down for the meal until he comes here.”
12 So he sent for him and brought him in. Now he was ruddy, with beautiful eyes, and handsome in appearance. Then Jehovah said: “Get up, anoint him, for this is the one!”
13 So Samuel took the horn of oil and anointed him in the presence of his brothers. And the spirit of Jehovah began to empower David from that day forward. Samuel later rose and went his way to Raʹmah.
14 Now the spirit of Jehovah had departed from Saul, and a bad spirit from Jehovah terrorized him.
15 The servants of Saul said to him: “You see that a bad spirit from God is terrorizing you.
16 Let our lord, please, command your servants before you to look for a man who is skilled at playing the harp. Whenever a bad spirit from God comes upon you, he will play it, and you will feel better.”
17 So Saul said to his servants: “Find me, please, a man who plays well, and bring him to me.”
18 One of the attendants said: “Look! I have seen how a son of Jesʹse the Bethʹle·hem·ite plays skillfully, and he is a courageous, mighty warrior. He can speak well, and he is handsome, and Jehovah is with him.”
19 Saul then sent messengers to Jesʹse and said: “Send to me your son David, who is with the flock.”
20 So Jesʹse loaded a donkey with bread, a skin bottle of wine, and a young goat and sent them to Saul with his son David.
21 Thus David came to Saul and began serving him. Saul grew to love him very much, and he became his armor-bearer.
22 Saul sent a message to Jesʹse: “Please let David remain in my service, for he has found favor in my eyes.”
23 Whenever a bad spirit from God came upon Saul, David took the harp and played it, and Saul found relief and felt better, and the bad spirit would depart from him.
19 Saul later spoke to Jonʹa·than his son and to all his servants about putting David to death.
2 Since Saul’s son Jonʹa·than was very fond of David, Jonʹa·than told David: “My father Saul wants to have you put to death. Please be on your guard in the morning, and go to a secret place and remain hidden.
3 I will go out and stand next to my father in the field where you will be. I will talk about you to my father, and if I learn anything, I will be sure to tell you.”
4 So Jonʹa·than spoke well of David to his father Saul. He said to him: “The king should not sin against his servant David, for he has not sinned against you and what he has done for you has benefited you.
5 He risked his life to strike down the Phi·lisʹtine, so that Jehovah brought about a great victory for all Israel. You saw it, and you were overjoyed. So why should you sin against innocent blood in having David put to death for no reason?”
6 Saul listened to Jonʹa·than, and Saul swore: “As surely as Jehovah is living, he will not be put to death.”
7 Afterward Jonʹa·than called David and told him all these things. So Jonʹa·than brought David to Saul, and he continued to serve him as before.
8 In time war broke out again, and David went out and fought against the Phi·lisʹtines and struck them down with a great slaughter, and they fled from before him.
9 And a bad spirit from Jehovah came upon Saul when he was sitting in his house with his spear in his hand, while David was playing music on the harp.
10 Saul tried to pin David to the wall with the spear, but he eluded Saul, who drove the spear into the wall. David fled and escaped during that night.
11 Saul later sent messengers to David’s house to watch it and to kill him in the morning, but David’s wife Miʹchal told him: “If you do not escape tonight, tomorrow you will be a dead man.”
12 Immediately Miʹchal let David down through the window, so that he could run away and escape.
13 Miʹchal took the teraphim statue and placed it on the bed, and she put a net of goat hair at the place of his head, and she covered it with a garment.
14 Saul now sent messengers to take David, but she said: “He is sick.”
15 So Saul sent the messengers to see David and told them: “Bring him to me on his bed to have him put to death.”
16 When the messengers came in, there was the teraphim statue on the bed and a net of goat hair where his head would have been.
17 Saul said to Miʹchal: “Why did you trick me like this and send my enemy away so that he could escape?” Miʹchal replied to Saul: “He said to me, ‘Send me away, or I will kill you!’”
18 Now David had run away and escaped, and he came to Samuel at Raʹmah. He told him all that Saul had done to him. Then he and Samuel went away, and they stayed in Naiʹoth.
19 In time it was reported to Saul: “Look! David is in Naiʹoth in Raʹmah.”
20 At once Saul sent messengers to seize David. When they saw the elderly ones of the prophets prophesying and Samuel standing and presiding over them, the spirit of God came to be upon Saul’s messengers, and they began behaving as prophets as well.
21 When they told it to Saul, he immediately sent other messengers, and they too began behaving as prophets. So Saul sent messengers again, a third group, and they too began behaving as prophets.
22 Finally he also went to Raʹmah. When he reached the great cistern that is in Seʹcu, he asked: “Where are Samuel and David?” They replied: “There in Naiʹoth in Raʹmah.”
23 While Saul was on his way from there to Naiʹoth in Raʹmah, the spirit of God came upon him as well, and he walked along behaving as a prophet until he came into Naiʹoth in Raʹmah.
24 He also stripped off his garments, and he too behaved as a prophet before Samuel, and he lay there naked all that day and all that night. That is why they say: “Is Saul also among the prophets?”
20 Then David ran away from Naiʹoth in Raʹmah. However, he came to Jonʹa·than and said: “What have I done? What is my offense, and how have I sinned against your father for him to seek my life?”
2 At this Jonʹa·than said to him: “It is unthinkable! You will not die. Look! My father will not do anything, great or small, without disclosing it to me. Why should my father hide this matter from me? This will not happen.”
3 But David swore further and said: “Your father surely knows that I have found favor in your eyes and would say, ‘Do not let Jonʹa·than know this or he will be upset.’ But as surely as Jehovah is living and as surely as you are living, there is only a step between me and death!”
4 Then Jonʹa·than said to David: “Whatever you say, I will do for you.”
5 David said to Jonʹa·than: “Tomorrow is the new moon, and I am certainly expected to sit with the king to eat; you must send me away, and I will hide in the field until the evening on the third day.
6 If your father misses me at all, then say, ‘David begged me for permission to go quickly to his city Bethʹle·hem, because there is a yearly sacrifice there for all the family.’
7 If his response is, ‘That is fine,’ it means peace to your servant. But if he becomes angry, you can be sure that he is determined to harm me.
8 Show loyal love to your servant, for you have brought your servant into Jehovah’s covenant with you. But if I am guilty, put me to death yourself. Why turn me over to your father?”
9 To this Jonʹa·than said: “It is unthinkable to suggest that about you! If I learn that my father is determined to harm you, would I not tell you?”
10 Then David said to Jonʹa·than: “Who will tell me whether your father gives you a harsh answer?”
11 Jonʹa·than said to David: “Come, let us go out into the field.” So both of them went out into the field.
12 And Jonʹa·than said to David: “Let Jehovah the God of Israel be a witness that I will sound out my father about this time tomorrow or by the third day. If he is favorably disposed toward David, will I not then send you word and disclose it to you?
13 But if my father intends to harm you, may Jehovah do that and more to Jonʹa·than if I do not disclose it to you and send you away in peace. May Jehovah be with you, just as he was with my father.
14 And will you not show me the loyal love of Jehovah while I am alive and even when I die?
15 Never withdraw your loyal love from my household, even when Jehovah wipes out all the enemies of David from the face of the earth.”
16 So Jonʹa·than made a covenant with the house of David, saying, “Jehovah will require it and call David’s enemies to account.”
17 So Jonʹa·than had David swear again by his love for him, for he loved him as he loved himself.
18 Jonʹa·than then said to him: “Tomorrow is the new moon, and you will be missed, for your seat will be vacant.
19 By the third day, you will be missed even more, and you must go to the place where you hid the other day and stay near the stone here.
20 I will then shoot three arrows to one side of it, as though I were shooting at a target.
21 When I send the attendant, I will say, ‘Go, find the arrows.’ If I say to the attendant, ‘Look! The arrows are on this side of you, get them,’ then you may come back, for as surely as Jehovah is living, it means everything is peaceful for you and there is no danger.
22 But if I should say to the boy, ‘Look! The arrows are beyond you,’ then go, for Jehovah has sent you away.
23 As for the promise that we have made, you and I, may Jehovah be between us forever.”
24 So David hid in the field. When the new moon came, the king took his seat at the meal to eat.
25 The king was sitting in his usual seat by the wall. Jonʹa·than was facing him, and Abʹner was sitting at Saul’s side, but David’s place was vacant.
26 Saul did not say anything that day, for he said to himself: ‘Something has happened so that he is not clean. Yes, he must be unclean.’
27 And the day after the new moon, on the second day, David’s place continued vacant. Saul then said to Jonʹa·than his son: “Why has the son of Jesʹse not come to the meal either yesterday or today?”
28 Jonʹa·than answered Saul: “David begged me for permission to go to Bethʹle·hem.
29 He said, ‘Please permit me to go, because we have a family sacrifice in the city, and my own brother summoned me. So if I have found favor in your eyes, please let me slip away to see my brothers.’ That is why he has not come to the king’s table.”
30 Then Saul became enraged with Jonʹa·than, and he said to him: “You son of a rebellious woman, do you think I do not know that you are choosing to side with the son of Jesʹse, to your own shame and to the shame of your mother?
31 As long as the son of Jesʹse is alive on the earth, you and your kingship will not be firmly established. So now send someone to bring him to me, for he must die.”
32 However, Jonʹa·than said to Saul his father: “Why should he be put to death? What has he done?”
33 At that Saul hurled the spear at him to strike him, so Jonʹa·than knew that his father was determined to put David to death.
34 Jonʹa·than immediately rose up from the table in the heat of anger, and he did not eat any food on the second day after the new moon, for he was upset over David and his own father had humiliated him.
35 In the morning Jonʹa·than went out to the field for the appointment with David, and a young attendant was with him.
36 And he said to his attendant: “Please run and find the arrows that I shoot.” The attendant ran, and Jonʹa·than shot the arrow beyond him.
37 When the attendant reached the place where Jonʹa·than had shot the arrow, Jonʹa·than called out to the attendant: “Is not the arrow beyond you?”
38 Jonʹa·than called out to the attendant: “Hurry! Go quickly! Do not delay!” And Jonʹa·than’s attendant picked up the arrows and came back to his master.
39 The attendant did not understand anything about the matter; only Jonʹa·than and David knew what was meant.
40 Then Jonʹa·than gave his weapons to his attendant and told him: “Go, take them to the city.”
41 When the attendant left, David rose up from a place nearby that was to the south. Then he fell with his face to the ground and bowed three times, and they kissed each other and wept for each other, but David wept the most.
42 Jonʹa·than said to David: “Go in peace, since we have both sworn in the name of Jehovah, saying, ‘May Jehovah be between you and me and between your offspring and my offspring forever.’” Then David rose up and left, and Jonʹa·than went back to the city.
21 David later came to Nob to A·himʹe·lech the priest. A·himʹe·lech began to tremble when he met David, and he said to him: “Why are you by yourself and no one is with you?”
2 David replied to A·himʹe·lech the priest: “The king instructed me to do something, but he said, ‘Do not let anyone know anything about the mission on which I am sending you and about the instructions I have given you.’ I made an appointment with my young men to meet at a certain place.
3 Now if there are five loaves of bread at your disposal, just give them to me, or whatever is available.”
4 But the priest answered David: “There is no ordinary bread on hand, but there is holy bread—provided that the young men have kept away from women.”
5 David answered the priest: “Women have certainly been kept away from us as on previous occasions when I went out on a campaign. If the bodies of the young men are holy even when the mission is ordinary, how much more so today should they be holy!”
6 So the priest gave him the holy bread, because there was no bread there except the showbread, which had been removed from Jehovah’s presence to be replaced by fresh bread on the day it was taken away.
7 Now one of Saul’s servants was there on that day, detained before Jehovah. His name was Doʹeg the Eʹdom·ite, the chief of Saul’s shepherds.
8 David then said to A·himʹe·lech: “Is there a spear or a sword here at your disposal? I did not take my own sword or my weapons with me, because the king’s mission was urgent.”
9 To this the priest said: “The sword of Go·liʹath the Phi·lisʹtine, whom you struck down in the Valley of Eʹlah, is here, wrapped up in a cloth behind the ephʹod. If you want to take it for yourself, take it, because it is the only one here.” David said: “There is none like it. Give it to me.”
10 That day David rose up and continued his flight from Saul, and he eventually came to King Aʹchish of Gath.
11 The servants of Aʹchish said to him: “Is this not David, the king of the land? Is he not the one they sang about when they danced, saying, ‘Saul has struck down his thousands, And David his tens of thousands’?”
12 David took these words to heart, and he became very much afraid of King Aʹchish of Gath.
13 So he disguised his sanity in their presence and acted insane while among them. He was making marks on the doors of the gate and letting his saliva run down his beard.
14 Finally Aʹchish said to his servants: “You see that this man is crazy! Why bring him to me?
15 Do I have a shortage of crazy men that I need to have this one acting crazy before me? Should this man enter my house?”
24 As soon as Saul returned from pursuing the Phi·lisʹtines, they told him: “Look! David is in the wilderness of En-gedʹi.”
2 So Saul took 3,000 men chosen from all Israel and went to look for David and his men on the rocky cliffs of the mountain goats.
3 Saul came to the stone sheepfolds along the road, where there was a cave, and he went in to relieve himself while David and his men were sitting in the recesses at the back of the cave.
4 David’s men said to him: “This is the day on which Jehovah is saying to you, ‘Look! I am giving your enemy into your hand, and you can do to him whatever seems good to you.’” So David rose up and quietly cut off the edge of Saul’s sleeveless coat.
5 But afterward David’s heart kept striking him because he had cut off the edge of Saul’s sleeveless coat.
6 He said to his men: “It is unthinkable from Jehovah’s standpoint that I should do such a thing to my lord, the anointed of Jehovah, by lifting my hand against him, for he is the anointed of Jehovah.”
7 So David restrained his men with these words, and he did not allow them to attack Saul. As for Saul, he rose up from the cave and went on his way.
8 Then David got up and went out from the cave and called out after Saul: “My lord the king!” When Saul looked behind him, David bowed down low with his face to the ground and prostrated himself.
9 David said to Saul: “Why do you listen to the words of men who say, ‘Look! David is seeking to harm you’?
10 This very day your own eyes have seen how Jehovah gave you into my hand in the cave. But when someone said to kill you, I had pity on you and said, ‘I will not lift my hand against my lord, for he is the anointed of Jehovah.’
11 And look, my father, yes, see the edge of your sleeveless coat in my hand; for when I cut off the edge of your sleeveless coat, I did not kill you. You can now see and understand that I do not intend to harm you or to rebel, and I have not sinned against you, whereas you are hunting me down to take my life.
12 May Jehovah judge between you and me, and may Jehovah take vengeance on you for me, but my hand will not come against you.
13 Just as the ancient proverb says, ‘From the wicked comes wickedness,’ but my hand will not come against you.
14 After whom has the king of Israel gone out? Whom are you chasing? A dead dog? A single flea?
15 May Jehovah be the judge, and he will judge between you and me, and he will see and will plead my case and judge me and rescue me from your hand.”
16 At the moment that David finished speaking these words to him, Saul said: “Is this your voice, my son David?” And Saul began to weep loudly.
17 He said to David: “You are more righteous than I am, for you have treated me well and I have repaid you with evil.
18 Yes, today you have told me of the good you did by not killing me when Jehovah surrendered me into your hand.
19 For what man finds his enemy and sends him on his way unharmed? Jehovah will reward you with good because of what you have done for me today.
20 And now look! I know that you will surely rule as king and that in your hand the kingdom of Israel will endure.
21 Now swear to me by Jehovah that you will not wipe out my descendants after me and that you will not annihilate my name out of my father’s house.”
22 So David swore to Saul, after which Saul went home. But David and his men went up to the stronghold.
26 In time the men of Ziph came to Saul at Gibʹe·ah, saying: “Is David not hiding on the hill of Hach·iʹlah facing Je·shiʹmon?”
2 So Saul rose up and went down to the wilderness of Ziph with 3,000 chosen men of Israel to look for David in the wilderness of Ziph.
3 Saul camped on the hill of Hach·iʹlah, which faces Je·shiʹmon, by the road. David was then living in the wilderness, and he learned that Saul had come into the wilderness after him.
4 So David sent spies to verify that Saul had indeed come.
5 David later went to the place where Saul had encamped, and David saw the place where Saul and Abʹner the son of Ner, the chief of his army, were lying asleep; Saul lay asleep in the camp enclosure with the troops camping all around him.
6 Then David said to A·himʹe·lech the Hitʹtite and A·bishʹai the son of Ze·ruʹiah, the brother of Joʹab: “Who will go down with me into the camp to Saul?” A·bishʹai replied: “I will go down with you.”
7 So David and A·bishʹai made their way to the troops by night, and they found Saul lying asleep in the camp enclosure with his spear stuck into the ground next to his head; Abʹner and the troops were lying all around him.
8 A·bishʹai now said to David: “Today God has surrendered your enemy into your hand. And now, please, let me pin him to the ground with the spear just once, and I will not need to do it twice.”
9 However, David said to A·bishʹai: “Do not harm him, for who can lift his hand against the anointed of Jehovah and remain innocent?”
10 David continued: “As surely as Jehovah is living, Jehovah himself will strike him down, or his day will come and he will die, or he will go down into battle and perish.
11 It is unthinkable from Jehovah’s standpoint for me to lift my hand against the anointed of Jehovah! So now take, please, the spear next to his head and the water jug, and let us be on our way.”
12 So David took the spear and the water jug from next to Saul’s head, and they went away. No one saw or noticed them or woke up, for they were all asleep, because a deep sleep from Jehovah had fallen upon them.
13 Then David crossed to the other side and stood on the top of the mountain some distance away, with a considerable space between them.
14 David called out to the troops and to Abʹner the son of Ner, saying: “Abʹner, will you not answer?” Abʹner answered: “Who are you who calls to the king?”
15 David said to Abʹner: “Are you not a man? And who is like you in Israel? So why did you not keep watch over your lord the king? For one of the soldiers came in to do away with your lord the king.
16 What you have done is not good. As surely as Jehovah is living, you deserve to die, because you have not kept watch over your lord, the anointed of Jehovah. Now look around! Where are the king’s spear and the water jug that were next to his head?”
17 Then Saul recognized the voice of David and said: “Is this your voice, my son David?” David replied: “It is my voice, my lord the king.”
18 He added: “Why is my lord chasing after his servant, for what have I done, and what am I guilty of?
19 My lord the king, please, listen to the words of his servant: If it is Jehovah who incited you against me, let him accept my grain offering. But if men have incited you, they are cursed before Jehovah, because they have driven me away today from being united with Jehovah’s inheritance, saying, ‘Go, serve other gods!’
20 And now do not let my blood fall to the ground away from the presence of Jehovah, for the king of Israel has gone out to look for a single flea, as if he were chasing a partridge on the mountains.”
21 In turn Saul said: “I have sinned. Come back, my son David, for I will do you no more harm, because you regarded my life as precious this day. Yes, I have acted foolishly and have made a terrible mistake.”
22 David answered: “Here is the spear of the king. Let one of the young men come over and take it.
23 It is Jehovah who will repay each one for his own righteousness and his own faithfulness, for today Jehovah gave you into my hand, but I was unwilling to lift my hand against the anointed of Jehovah.
24 Look! Just as your life was precious to me this day, so may my life be precious in the eyes of Jehovah, and may he rescue me out of all distress.”
25 Saul replied to David: “May you be blessed, my son David. You will surely do great things, and you will surely prevail.” Then David went on his way, and Saul returned to his place.
28 In those days the Phi·lisʹtines assembled their armies for war against Israel. So Aʹchish said to David: “You know, of course, that you and your men will go out into battle with me.”
2 At that David said to Aʹchish: “You surely know what your servant will do.” Aʹchish said to David: “That is why I will appoint you as my permanent bodyguard.”
3 Now Samuel had died, and all Israel had mourned him and had buried him in Raʹmah, his own city. And Saul had removed the spirit mediums and the fortune-tellers from the land.
4 The Phi·lisʹtines assembled and went and set up camp in Shuʹnem. So Saul assembled all Israel, and they set up camp in Gil·boʹa.
5 When Saul saw the camp of the Phi·lisʹtines, he was afraid, and his heart trembled greatly.
6 Although Saul would inquire of Jehovah, Jehovah never answered him, either in dreams or by the Uʹrim or through the prophets.
7 Finally Saul said to his servants: “Find me a woman who is a spirit medium, and I will go and consult her.” His servants replied: “Look! There is a woman who is a spirit medium in En-dor.”
8 So Saul disguised himself and put on other garments and went to the woman by night with two of his men. He said: “Use divination, please, by acting as a spirit medium, and bring up for me the one whom I designate to you.”
9 However, the woman said to him: “You must know what Saul did, how he removed the spirit mediums and the fortune-tellers from the land. Why, then, are you trying to trap me to have me put to death?”
10 Saul then swore to her by Jehovah, saying: “As surely as Jehovah is alive, you will not incur any guilt in this matter!”
11 At this the woman said: “Whom should I bring up for you?” He replied: “Bring up Samuel for me.”
12 When the woman saw “Samuel,” she cried out at the top of her voice and said to Saul: “Why did you trick me? You are Saul!”
13 The king said to her: “Do not be afraid, but what do you see?” The woman replied to Saul: “I see one like a god coming up out of the earth.”
14 At once he asked her: “What does he look like?” to which she said: “It is an old man coming up, and he is clothed in a sleeveless coat.” At that Saul realized that it was “Samuel,” and he bowed low with his face to the ground and prostrated himself.
15 Then “Samuel” said to Saul: “Why have you disturbed me by having me brought up?” Saul replied: “I am in great trouble. The Phi·lisʹtines are fighting against me, and God has departed from me and no longer answers me, either through the prophets or in dreams; so that is why I am calling on you to let me know what I should do.”
16 And “Samuel” said: “Why do you inquire of me now that Jehovah has departed from you and has become your adversary?
17 Jehovah will do for himself what he foretold through me: Jehovah will rip the kingdom out of your hands and give it to one of your fellow men, David.
18 Because you did not obey the voice of Jehovah and you did not execute his burning anger against the A·malʹek·ites, that is why Jehovah is doing this to you this day.
19 Jehovah will also give both Israel and you into the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines, and tomorrow you and your sons will be with me. Jehovah will also give the army of Israel into the hands of the Phi·lisʹtines.”
20 At once Saul fell full length on the ground and became very much afraid because of “Samuel’s” words. And there was no strength left in him, because he had not eaten food all day and all night.
21 When the woman came to Saul and saw that he had been greatly disturbed, she said to him: “Here your servant has obeyed what you said, and I risked my life and did what you told me to do.
22 Now, please, listen to what your servant has to say. Let me set before you a piece of bread; then eat so that you will have some strength to go on your way.”
23 But he refused and said: “I am not going to eat.” However, his servants and also the woman kept urging him. Finally he listened to them and got up from the ground and sat on the bed.
24 The woman had a fattened calf in the house, so she quickly slaughtered it and took flour and kneaded dough and baked it into unleavened bread.
25 She served them to Saul and his servants, and they ate. After that they rose up and left during the night.
29 The Phi·lisʹtines assembled all their armies at Aʹphek, while the Israelites were camping by the spring in Jezʹre·el.
2 And the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines were passing by with their hundreds and their thousands, and David and his men were marching at the rear with Aʹchish.
3 But the princes of the Phi·lisʹtines said: “Why are these Hebrews here?” Aʹchish replied to the princes of the Phi·lisʹtines: “This is David, the servant of King Saul of Israel, who has been with me for a year or more. I have not found any fault in him from the day he deserted to me until today.”
4 But the princes of the Phi·lisʹtines became indignant at him, and they said to him: “Make the man go back. Let him return to the place where you assigned him. Do not let him go down with us into the battle, so that he will not turn against us during the battle. For what better way to put himself in favor with his lord than with the heads of our men?
5 Is this not the David about whom they sang when they danced, saying: ‘Saul has struck down his thousands, And David his tens of thousands’?”
6 So Aʹchish summoned David and said to him: “As surely as Jehovah is living, you are upright, and I am pleased to have you go on the campaign with my army, for I have not found any fault with you from the day you came to me until today. But the lords do not trust you.
7 So return in peace, and do not do anything to displease the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines.”
8 However, David said to Aʹchish: “Why, what have I done? What fault have you found in your servant from the day that I came to you until today? Why should I not come with you and fight against the enemies of my lord the king?”
9 Aʹchish answered David: “From my standpoint, you have been as good as an angel of God. But the princes of the Phi·lisʹtines have said, ‘Do not let him go up with us into the battle.’
10 Now get up early in the morning with the servants of your lord who came with you; rise up and leave early in the morning as soon as it is light.”
11 So David and his men rose up early in the morning to return to the land of the Phi·lisʹtines, and the Phi·lisʹtines went up to Jezʹre·el.
31 Now the Phi·lisʹtines were fighting against Israel. And the men of Israel fled from before the Phi·lisʹtines, and many fell slain on Mount Gil·boʹa.
2 The Phi·lisʹtines kept in close range of Saul and his sons, and the Phi·lisʹtines struck down Jonʹa·than, A·binʹa·dab, and Malʹchi-shuʹa, Saul’s sons.
3 The fighting grew fierce against Saul, and the archers found him, and he was severely wounded by the archers.
4 Then Saul said to his armor-bearer: “Draw your sword and run me through with it, so that these uncircumcised men may not come and run me through and deal ruthlessly with me.” But his armor-bearer was unwilling, because he was very much afraid. So Saul took the sword and fell on it.
5 When his armor-bearer saw that Saul was dead, he too fell on his own sword and died with him.
6 Thus Saul, his three sons, his armor-bearer, and all his men died together on that day.
7 When the people of Israel who were in the region of the valley and in the region of the Jordan saw that the men of Israel had fled and that Saul and his sons had died, they began to abandon the cities and flee; the Phi·lisʹtines then came and occupied them.
8 The next day, when the Phi·lisʹtines came to strip the slain, they found Saul and his three sons fallen on Mount Gil·boʹa.
9 So they cut off his head and stripped off his armor and sent word throughout the land of the Phi·lisʹtines to spread the news in the houses of their idols and among the people.
10 Then they put his armor in the house of the Ashʹto·reth images and fastened his corpse to the wall of Beth-shan.
11 When the inhabitants of Jaʹbesh-gilʹe·ad heard what the Phi·lisʹtines had done to Saul,
12 all the warriors rose and traveled all night and took the bodies of Saul and his sons off the wall of Beth-shan. They returned to Jaʹbesh and burned them there.
13 Then they took their bones and buried them under the tamarisk tree in Jaʹbesh, and they fasted for seven days.
1 After Saul’s death, when David had returned from defeating the A·malʹek·ites, David stayed at Zikʹlag for two days.
2 On the third day, a man came from the camp of Saul with his garments ripped apart and dirt on his head. When he approached David, he fell down to the ground and prostrated himself.
3 David asked him: “Where are you coming from?” He replied: “I have escaped from the camp of Israel.”
4 David asked him: “How did things turn out? Please tell me.” To this he said: “The people have fled from the battle and many have fallen and died. Even Saul and his son Jonʹa·than have died.”
5 Then David asked the young man who brought him the news: “How do you know that Saul and his son Jonʹa·than are dead?”
6 The young man replied: “By chance I was on Mount Gil·boʹa, and there was Saul supporting himself on his spear, and the chariots and horsemen had caught up with him.
7 When he turned around and saw me, he called me, and I said, ‘Here I am!’
8 He asked me, ‘Who are you?’ I replied, ‘I am an A·malʹek·ite.’
9 Then he said, ‘Please stand over me and put me to death, for I am in great agony, but I am still alive.’
10 So I stood over him and put him to death, for I knew that he could not survive after he had fallen down wounded. Then I took the crown that was on his head and the bracelet that was on his arm, and I brought them here to my lord.”
11 At this David took hold of his garments and ripped them apart, and so did all the men who were with him.
12 And they wailed and wept and fasted until evening for Saul, for his son Jonʹa·than, for the people of Jehovah, and for the house of Israel, because they had fallen by the sword.
13 David asked the young man who brought him the news: “Where are you from?” He said: “I am the son of a foreign resident, an A·malʹek·ite.”
14 Then David said to him: “Why did you not fear to lift your hand to do away with the anointed of Jehovah?”
15 With that David called one of the young men and said: “Step forward and strike him.” So he struck him down, and he died.
16 David said to him: “Your blood is on your own head, because your own mouth testified against you by saying, ‘I myself put the anointed of Jehovah to death.’”
17 Then David chanted this dirge over Saul and his son Jonʹa·than
18 and said that the people of Judah should be taught the dirge called “The Bow,” which is written in the book of Jaʹshar:
19 “The beauty, O Israel, lies slain upon your high places. How the mighty have fallen!
20 Do not tell it in Gath; Do not announce it in the streets of Ashʹke·lon, Or the daughters of the Phi·lisʹtines will rejoice, Or the daughters of the uncircumcised men will exult.
21 You mountains of Gil·boʹa, May there be no dew or rain upon you, Nor fields producing holy contributions, Because there the shield of mighty ones was defiled, The shield of Saul is no longer anointed with oil.
22 From the blood of the slain, from the fat of mighty ones, The bow of Jonʹa·than did not turn back, And the sword of Saul would not return without success.
23 Saul and Jonʹa·than, beloved and cherished during their life, And in death they were not separated. Swifter than the eagles they were, Mightier than the lions.
24 O daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, Who clothed you in scarlet and finery, Who put gold ornaments upon your clothing.
25 How the mighty have fallen in battle! Jonʹa·than lies slain upon your high places!
26 I am distressed over you, my brother Jonʹa·than; You were very dear to me. More wonderful was your love to me than the love of women.
27 How the mighty have fallen And the weapons of war have perished!”
4 When Saul’s son Ish-boʹsheth heard that Abʹner had died in Hebʹron, his courage failed him and all the Israelites were disturbed.
2 There were two men in charge of the marauder bands that belonged to the son of Saul: one was named Baʹa·nah and the other Reʹchab. They were sons of Rimʹmon the Be·erʹoth·ite, of the tribe of Benjamin. (For Be·erʹoth too used to be counted as part of Benjamin.
3 The Be·erʹoth·ites ran away to Gitʹta·im, and they are foreign residents there down to this day.)
4 Now Saul’s son Jonʹa·than had a son whose feet were crippled. He was five years old when the report about Saul and Jonʹa·than came from Jezʹre·el, and his nurse picked him up and fled, but as she was fleeing in panic, he fell and was crippled. His name was Me·phibʹo·sheth.
5 The sons of Rimʹmon the Be·erʹoth·ite, Reʹchab and Baʹa·nah, went to the house of Ish-boʹsheth during the hot part of the day, as he was taking his midday rest.
6 They went into the house as if they were getting wheat, and they struck him in the abdomen; then Reʹchab and his brother Baʹa·nah escaped.
7 When they had entered the house, he was lying on his bed in his bedroom, and they struck him and put him to death, after which they cut off his head. Then they took his head and walked all night long on the road to the Arʹa·bah.
8 And they brought the head of Ish-boʹsheth to David at Hebʹron and said to the king: “Here is the head of Ish-boʹsheth the son of Saul your enemy who sought your life. This day Jehovah gives to my lord the king revenge on Saul and his descendants.”
9 However, David answered Reʹchab and his brother Baʹa·nah, the sons of Rimʹmon the Be·erʹoth·ite, and said to them: “As surely as Jehovah is living, the one who rescued me out of all distress,
10 when someone reported to me, ‘Here Saul is dead,’ and he thought he was bringing me good news, I took hold of him and killed him in Zikʹlag. That was the messenger’s reward he received from me!
11 How much more so when wicked men have killed a righteous man in his own house on his bed! Should I not require his blood from your hands and rid the earth of you?”
12 David then ordered the young men to kill them. They cut off their hands and feet and hung them by the pool in Hebʹron. But they took the head of Ish-boʹsheth and buried it in the burial place of Abʹner in Hebʹron.
6 David again gathered all the best troops in Israel, 30,000 men.
2 Then David and all the men with him set out for Baʹal·e-juʹdah to bring up from there the Ark of the true God, before which people call on the name of Jehovah of armies, who sits enthroned above the cherubs.
3 However, they placed the Ark of the true God on a new wagon to transport it from the house of A·binʹa·dab, which was on the hill; and Uzʹzah and A·hiʹo, the sons of A·binʹa·dab, were leading the new wagon.
4 So they transported the Ark of the true God from A·binʹa·dab’s house on the hill, and A·hiʹo was walking ahead of the Ark.
5 David and all the house of Israel were celebrating before Jehovah with all sorts of juniper-wood instruments, harps, other stringed instruments, tambourines, sistrums, and cymbals.
6 But when they came to the threshing floor of Naʹcon, Uzʹzah thrust his hand out to the Ark of the true God and grabbed hold of it, for the cattle nearly upset it.
7 At that Jehovah’s anger blazed against Uzʹzah, and the true God struck him down there for his irreverent act, and he died there beside the Ark of the true God.
8 But David became angry because Jehovah’s wrath had broken through against Uzʹzah; and that place has been called Peʹrez-uzʹzah down to this day.
9 So David became fearful of Jehovah on that day and said: “How can the Ark of Jehovah come to me?”
10 David was not willing to bring the Ark of Jehovah to where he was in the City of David. Instead, David had it taken to the house of Oʹbed-eʹdom the Gitʹtite.
11 The Ark of Jehovah remained at the house of Oʹbed-eʹdom the Gitʹtite for three months, and Jehovah kept blessing Oʹbed-eʹdom and all his household.
12 The report was made to King David: “Jehovah has blessed the house of Oʹbed-eʹdom and all that belongs to him because of the Ark of the true God.” So David went to bring the Ark of the true God from the house of Oʹbed-eʹdom up to the City of David with rejoicing.
13 When the carriers of the Ark of Jehovah had marched six steps, he sacrificed a bull and a fattened animal.
14 David was dancing around before Jehovah with all his might; all the while David wore a linen ephʹod.
15 David and all the house of Israel were bringing up the Ark of Jehovah with joyful shouting and with the sound of the horn.
16 But when the Ark of Jehovah came into the City of David, Saul’s daughter Miʹchal looked down through the window and saw King David leaping and dancing around before Jehovah; and she began to despise him in her heart.
17 So they brought the Ark of Jehovah in and set it in its place inside the tent that David had pitched for it. Then David offered up burnt offerings and communion sacrifices before Jehovah.
18 When David finished offering up the burnt offerings and the communion sacrifices, he blessed the people in the name of Jehovah of armies.
19 Further, he distributed to all the people, to the whole multitude of Israel, to each man and woman, a ring-shaped loaf of bread, a date cake, and a raisin cake, and then all the people left, each to his own house.
20 When David returned to bless his own household, Saul’s daughter Miʹchal came out to meet him. She said: “How glorious the king of Israel made himself when he uncovered himself today before the eyes of the slave girls of his servants, just as an empty-headed man openly uncovers himself!”
21 At this David said to Miʹchal: “My celebration was before Jehovah, who chose me rather than your father and all his household and who appointed me as leader over Jehovah’s people, Israel. Therefore, I will celebrate before Jehovah,
22 and I will humble myself even more than this and become low even in my own eyes. But by the slave girls whom you mentioned, I will be glorified.”
23 So Saul’s daughter Miʹchal had no children down to the day of her death.
7 When the king was settled in his own house and Jehovah had given him rest from all his surrounding enemies,
2 the king said to Nathan the prophet: “Here I am living in a house of cedars while the Ark of the true God sits in the midst of tent cloths.”
3 Nathan replied to the king: “Go and do whatever is in your heart, for Jehovah is with you.”
4 On that very night, the word of Jehovah came to Nathan, saying:
5 “Go and say to my servant David, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Should you build me a house to dwell in?
6 For I have not dwelled in a house from the day I brought the people of Israel out of Egypt to this day, but I have been moving about in a tent and in a tabernacle.
7 During all the time that I went with all the Israelites, did I ever say one word to any of the tribal leaders of Israel whom I appointed to shepherd my people Israel, saying, ‘Why did you not build a house of cedars for me?’”’
8 Now say this to my servant David, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “I took you from the pastures, from following the flock, to become a leader over my people Israel.
9 And I will be with you wherever you go, and I will do away with all your enemies from before you; and I will make a great name for you like the name of the great men of the earth.
10 I will appoint a place for my people Israel and settle them, and they will live there and not be disturbed anymore; and wicked men will not oppress them again as they did in the past,
11 from the day that I appointed judges over my people Israel. And I will give you rest from all your enemies. “‘“Also, Jehovah has told you that Jehovah will make a house for you.
12 When your days come to an end and you are laid to rest with your forefathers, then I will raise up your offspring after you, your own son, and I will firmly establish his kingdom.
13 He is the one who will build a house for my name, and I will firmly establish the throne of his kingdom forever.
14 I will become his father, and he will become my son. When he does wrong, I will reprove him with the rod of men and with the strokes of the sons of men.
15 My loyal love will not be taken away from him the way I took it away from Saul, whom I removed from before you.
16 Your house and your kingdom will be secure forever before you; your throne will be firmly established forever.”’”
17 Nathan told David all these words and this entire vision.
18 At that King David came in and sat down before Jehovah and said: “Who am I, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah? And what is my house that you have brought me this far?
19 As if this were not enough, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, you also speak about the house of your servant down to a distant future time; and this is instruction for all mankind, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
20 What more can your servant David say to you when you know me so well, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah?
21 For the sake of your word and in agreement with your heart you have done all these great things and have revealed them to your servant.
22 That is why you are truly great, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah. There is no one like you, and there is no God except you; everything we have heard with our ears confirms this.
23 And what other nation on earth is like your people Israel? God went and redeemed them as his people, making a name for himself by doing great and awe-inspiring things for them. You drove out the nations and their gods in behalf of your people, whom you redeemed to yourself from Egypt.
24 You established your people Israel as your own people for all time; and you, O Jehovah, have become their God.
25 “Now, O Jehovah God, carry out the promise you have made concerning your servant and his house for all time, and may you do just as you have promised.
26 May your name be exalted forever, so that people may say, ‘Jehovah of armies is God over Israel,’ and may the house of your servant David be firmly established before you.
27 For you, Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, have made a revelation to your servant by saying, ‘I will build a house for you.’ That is why your servant has the courage to pray this prayer to you.
28 And now, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, you are the true God, and your words are truth, and you have promised these good things to your servant.
29 So may it please you to bless the house of your servant, and may it continue forever before you; for you, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, have promised, and with your blessing may the house of your servant be blessed forever.”
11 At the start of the year, at the time when kings go on campaigns, David sent Joʹab and his servants and the entire army of Israel to bring the Amʹmon·ites to ruin, and they besieged Rabʹbah, while David stayed in Jerusalem.
2 One evening David got up from his bed and walked around on the rooftop of the king’s house. From the rooftop he saw a woman bathing, and the woman was very beautiful.
3 David sent someone to inquire about the woman, and he reported: “Is this not Bath-sheʹba the daughter of E·liʹam and the wife of U·riʹah the Hitʹtite?”
4 Then David sent messengers to bring her. So she came in to him, and he lay down with her. (This happened while she was purifying herself from her uncleanness.) Afterward, she returned to her house.
5 The woman became pregnant, and she sent a message to David: “I am pregnant.”
6 At this David sent a message to Joʹab: “Send to me U·riʹah the Hitʹtite.” So Joʹab sent U·riʹah to David.
7 When U·riʹah came to him, David asked him how Joʹab was getting along, how the troops were getting along, and how the war was going.
8 David then said to U·riʹah: “Go down to your house and relax.” When U·riʹah left the king’s house, the king’s courtesy gift was sent after him.
9 However, U·riʹah slept at the entrance of the king’s house with all the other servants of his lord, and he did not go down to his own house.
10 So David was told: “U·riʹah did not go down to his own house.” At that David said to U·riʹah: “Have you not just returned from a journey? Why did you not go down to your own house?”
11 U·riʹah replied to David: “The Ark and Israel and Judah are dwelling in temporary shelters, and my lord Joʹab and the servants of my lord are camping in the open field. So should I go into my own house to eat and drink and lie down with my wife? As surely as you live and are alive, I will not do this thing!”
12 Then David said to U·riʹah: “Stay here also today, and tomorrow I will send you away.” So U·riʹah stayed in Jerusalem on that day and the following day.
13 David then sent for him to come and eat and drink with him, and he got him drunk. But in the evening, he went out to sleep on his bed with the servants of his lord, and he did not go down to his house.
14 In the morning David wrote a letter to Joʹab and sent it by the hand of U·riʹah.
15 He wrote in the letter: “Put U·riʹah in the front lines where the fighting is fiercest. Then retreat from behind him, so that he will be struck down and die.”
16 Joʹab had been carefully watching the city, and he stationed U·riʹah where he knew there were mighty warriors.
17 When the men of the city came out and fought against Joʹab, some of David’s servants fell, and U·riʹah the Hitʹtite was among those who died.
18 Joʹab now reported to David all the news about the war.
19 He instructed the messenger: “When you finish speaking to the king about all the news of the war,
20 the king may become angry and say to you, ‘Why did you have to go so near to the city to fight? Did you not know that they would shoot from the top of the wall?
21 Who struck down A·bimʹe·lech the son of Je·rubʹbe·sheth? Was it not a woman who threw an upper millstone on him from the top of the wall, causing his death at Theʹbez? Why did you have to go so close to the wall?’ Then say, ‘Your servant U·riʹah the Hitʹtite also died.’”
22 So the messenger went and told David everything that Joʹab had sent him to tell.
23 Then the messenger told David: “Their men overpowered us, and they came out against us in the field; but we drove them back to the entrance of the city gate.
24 And the archers were shooting at your servants from the top of the wall, and some of the servants of the king died; your servant U·riʹah the Hitʹtite also died.”
25 At that David said to the messenger: “Say this to Joʹab: ‘Do not let this matter trouble you, for the sword devours one as well as another. Intensify your battle against the city and conquer it.’ And encourage him.”
26 When U·riʹah’s wife heard that her husband U·riʹah had died, she began to mourn her husband.
27 As soon as the mourning period was over, David sent for her and brought her to his house, and she became his wife and bore him a son. But what David had done was very displeasing to Jehovah.
12 So Jehovah sent Nathan to David. He came in to him and said: “There were two men in one city, the one rich and the other poor.
2 The rich man had very many sheep and cattle;
3 but the poor man had nothing but one small female lamb, which he had bought. He cared for it, and it grew up together with him and his sons. It would eat from the little food he had and drink from his cup and sleep in his arms. It became as a daughter to him.
4 Later a visitor came to the rich man, but he would not take any of his own sheep and cattle to prepare a meal for the traveler who had come to him. Instead, he took the poor man’s lamb and prepared it for the man who had come to him.”
5 At this David grew very angry against the man, and he said to Nathan: “As surely as Jehovah is living, the man who did this deserves to die!
6 And he should pay for the lamb four times over, because he did this and showed no compassion.”
7 Then Nathan said to David: “You are the man! This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: ‘I myself anointed you as king over Israel, and I rescued you from the hand of Saul.
8 I was willing to give you your master’s house and put your master’s wives in your arms, and I gave you the house of Israel and of Judah. And as if that were not enough, I was willing to do much more for you.
9 Why did you despise the word of Jehovah by doing what is bad in his eyes? You struck down U·riʹah the Hitʹtite with the sword! Then you took his wife as your wife after you killed him by the sword of the Amʹmon·ites.
10 Now a sword will never depart from your own house, because you despised me by taking the wife of U·riʹah the Hitʹtite as your wife.’
11 This is what Jehovah says: ‘Here I am bringing against you calamity from within your own house; and before your own eyes, I will take your wives and give them to another man, and he will lie down with your wives in broad daylight.
12 Although you acted in secret, I will do this in front of all Israel and in broad daylight.’”
13 David then said to Nathan: “I have sinned against Jehovah.” Nathan replied to David: “Jehovah, in turn, forgives your sin. You will not die.
14 Nevertheless, because you have treated Jehovah with utter disrespect in this matter, the son just born to you will certainly die.”
15 Then Nathan went to his own house. And Jehovah struck the child whom U·riʹah’s wife had borne to David, and he became sick.
16 David pleaded with the true God in behalf of the boy. David went on a strict fast and would go in and spend the night lying on the ground.
17 So the elders of his house stood over him and tried to raise him up from the ground, but he refused and would not eat with them.
18 On the seventh day the child died, but David’s servants were afraid to tell him that the child was dead. They said: “While the child was alive we spoke to him, and he did not listen to us. So how can we tell him that the child has died? He may do something terrible.”
19 When David saw that his servants were whispering to one another, he discerned that the child had died. David said to his servants: “Has the child died?” They replied: “He has died.”
20 So David got up from the ground. He washed, rubbed himself with oil, changed his clothing, and went to the house of Jehovah and prostrated himself. Afterward, he went to his house and asked for food to be brought to him, and he ate.
21 His servants asked him: “Why have you acted in this way? While the child was alive, you fasted and kept weeping; but as soon as the child died, you got up and ate food.”
22 He replied: “While the child was alive, I fasted and kept weeping because I said to myself, ‘Who knows whether Jehovah may show me favor and let the child live?’
23 Now that he has died, why should I fast? Can I bring him back? I will go to him, but he will not return to me.”
24 Then David comforted his wife Bath-sheʹba. He went in to her and lay down with her. In time she bore a son, and he was named Solʹo·mon. And Jehovah loved him,
25 and he sent word through Nathan the prophet to name him Jed·i·diʹah, for the sake of Jehovah.
26 Joʹab continued fighting against Rabʹbah of the Amʹmon·ites, and he captured the royal city.
27 So Joʹab sent messengers to David and said: “I have fought against Rabʹbah, and I have captured the city of waters.
28 Now gather the rest of the troops and encamp against the city and capture it. Otherwise, I will be the one to capture the city, and it will be credited to me.”
29 So David gathered all the troops and went to Rabʹbah and fought against it and captured it.
30 Then he took the crown of Malʹcam from its head. The weight of it was a talent of gold, along with precious stones, and it was placed on David’s head. He also took a vast amount of spoil from the city.
31 And he brought out the people who were in it and put them to work at sawing stones, at working with sharp iron instruments and with iron axes, and at brickmaking. That was what he did to all the cities of the Amʹmon·ites. Finally David and all the troops returned to Jerusalem.
13 Now David’s son Abʹsa·lom had a beautiful sister named Taʹmar, and David’s son Amʹnon fell in love with her.
2 Amʹnon was so distressed that he became sick because of his sister Taʹmar, for she was a virgin and it seemed impossible for Amʹnon to do anything to her.
3 Now Amʹnon had a companion named Je·honʹa·dab, the son of Shimʹe·ah, David’s brother; and Je·honʹa·dab was a very clever man.
4 So he said to him: “Why are you, the king’s son, so depressed every morning? Why not tell me?” Amʹnon replied to him: “I am in love with Taʹmar, the sister of my brother Abʹsa·lom.”
5 Je·honʹa·dab replied to him: “Lie down on your bed and pretend to be sick. When your father comes to see you, say to him, ‘Please, let my sister Taʹmar come and serve me some food. If she prepares the food given to the sick before my eyes, I will eat it from her hand.’”
6 So Amʹnon lay down and pretended to be sick, and the king came in to see him. Then Amʹnon said to the king: “Please, let my sister Taʹmar come in and bake two heart-shaped cakes before my eyes so that I may take food from her hand.”
7 At that David sent a message to Taʹmar at the house, saying: “Please go to the house of your brother Amʹnon and prepare food for him.”
8 So Taʹmar went to the house of her brother Amʹnon, where he was lying down. She took the dough and kneaded it into cakes before his eyes and cooked the cakes.
9 Then she took the pan and served him. But Amʹnon refused to eat and said: “Have everybody leave me!” So everybody left him.
10 Amʹnon now said to Taʹmar: “Bring the food into the bedroom, so that I may eat it from your hand.” So Taʹmar took the heart-shaped cakes that she had made and brought them to her brother Amʹnon in the bedroom.
11 When she brought them for him to eat, he grabbed her and said: “Come, lie down with me, my sister.”
12 But she said to him: “No, my brother! Do not humiliate me, for such a thing is not done in Israel. Do not do this disgraceful thing.
13 How could I live down my shame? And you will be regarded as one of the disgraceful men in Israel. Now speak, please, to the king, for he will not withhold me from you.”
14 But he refused to listen to her, and he overpowered her and humiliated her by raping her.
15 Then Amʹnon began hating her with a very intense hatred, so that his hatred for her became greater than the love he had felt for her. Amʹnon said to her: “Get up; go away!”
16 At this she said to him: “No, my brother, for sending me away now is worse than what you have done with me!” But he refused to listen to her.
17 With that he called his young attendant and said: “Get this person out of my presence, please, and lock the door behind her.”
18 (Now she was wearing a special robe, for those were the garments that the virgin daughters of the king wore.) So his attendant led her outside, and he locked the door behind her.
19 Then Taʹmar put ashes on her head, and she ripped apart the fine robe she was wearing; and she kept her hands on her head and walked off, crying out as she walked.
20 At this her brother Abʹsa·lom asked her: “Was it your brother Amʹnon who was with you? And now keep silent, my sister. He is your brother. Do not let your heart dwell on this matter.” Then Taʹmar lived in isolation at the house of her brother Abʹsa·lom.
21 When King David heard about all these things, he became very angry. But he would not hurt the feelings of Amʹnon his son, because he loved him, for he was his firstborn.
22 And Abʹsa·lom said nothing to Amʹnon, either bad or good; for Abʹsa·lom hated Amʹnon because he had humiliated his sister Taʹmar.
23 After two full years, Abʹsa·lom’s sheepshearers were at Baʹal-haʹzor, near Eʹphra·im, and Abʹsa·lom invited all the sons of the king.
24 So Abʹsa·lom came in to the king and said: “Your servant is having his sheep sheared. Please let the king and his servants go with me.”
25 But the king said to Abʹsa·lom: “No, my son. If all of us go, we will be a burden to you.” Although he kept urging him, he did not consent to go, but he blessed him.
26 Abʹsa·lom then said: “If not you, please let my brother Amʹnon go with us.” The king replied to him: “Why should he go with you?”
27 But Abʹsa·lom urged him, so he sent Amʹnon and all the king’s sons with him.
28 Then Abʹsa·lom ordered his attendants: “Watch, and when Amʹnon’s heart is in a cheerful mood from the wine, I will say to you, ‘Strike down Amʹnon!’ You must then put him to death. Do not be afraid. Is it not I who command you? Be strong and courageous.”
29 So Abʹsa·lom’s attendants did to Amʹnon exactly as Abʹsa·lom had ordered; then all the other sons of the king got up, and each one mounted his mule and fled.
30 While they were on the way, the report reached David: “Abʹsa·lom has struck down all the sons of the king, and not one of them survived.”
31 At this the king got up and ripped his clothes apart and lay on the ground, and all his servants were standing by with their garments ripped apart.
32 However, Je·honʹa·dab the son of Shimʹe·ah, David’s brother, said: “Do not let my lord think that they have killed all the young sons of the king, for only Amʹnon has died. This is by the order of Abʹsa·lom, who decided to do this from the day that Amʹnon humiliated his sister Taʹmar.
33 Now do not let my lord the king pay attention to the report that says, ‘All the king’s sons have died’; only Amʹnon has died.”
34 Meanwhile, Abʹsa·lom ran away. Later the watchman raised his eyes and saw that there were many people coming from the road behind him next to the mountain.
35 At this Je·honʹa·dab said to the king: “Look! The king’s sons have returned. It is just as your servant said.”
36 As he finished speaking, the king’s sons came in, weeping loudly; also the king and all his servants wept very bitterly.
37 But Abʹsa·lom fled and went to Talʹmai the son of Am·miʹhud the king of Geshʹur. David mourned his son for many days.
38 After Abʹsa·lom fled and went to Geshʹur, he stayed there for three years.
39 Finally King David longed to go to Abʹsa·lom, for he had become reconciled to the death of Amʹnon.
17 A·hithʹo·phel then said to Abʹsa·lom: “Please let me choose 12,000 men and rise up and chase after David tonight.
2 I will come upon him when he is weary and powerless, and I will throw him into a panic; and all the people who are with him will flee, and I will strike down only the king.
3 Then I will bring all the people back to you. The return of all the people depends on what happens with the man you are seeking. Then all the people will be at peace.”
4 The proposal was just right in the eyes of Abʹsa·lom and all the elders of Israel.
5 However, Abʹsa·lom said: “Please call Huʹshai the Arʹchite as well, and let us hear what he has to say.”
6 So Huʹshai came in to Abʹsa·lom. Then Abʹsa·lom said to him: “This is the advice A·hithʹo·phel gave. Should we act on his advice? If not, you tell us.”
7 At this Huʹshai said to Abʹsa·lom: “The advice that A·hithʹo·phel gave is not good in this instance!”
8 Huʹshai continued: “You well know that your father and his men are mighty, and they are desperate, like a bear that has lost her cubs in the field. Moreover, your father is a warrior, and he will not spend the night with the people.
9 At this very moment he is hiding in one of the caves or in some other place; and if he attacks first, those hearing of it will say, ‘The people following Abʹsa·lom have been defeated!’
10 Even the courageous man whose heart is like that of a lion will surely melt in fear, for all Israel knows that your father is a mighty man and that the men with him are courageous.
11 I give this advice: Let all Israel be gathered to you, from Dan to Beʹer-sheʹba, as many as the grains of sand by the sea, and you should lead them into the fight.
12 We will come against him wherever he is found, and we will come upon him just like the dew that falls on the ground; and not one of them will survive, not he nor any of the men with him.
13 If he retreats into a city, all Israel will carry ropes to that city, and we will drag it down into the valley until not even a pebble is left.”
14 Then Abʹsa·lom and all the men of Israel said: “The advice of Huʹshai the Arʹchite is better than the advice of A·hithʹo·phel!” For Jehovah had determined to frustrate the sound advice of A·hithʹo·phel, so that Jehovah could bring disaster on Abʹsa·lom.
15 Huʹshai later said to Zaʹdok and A·biʹa·thar the priests: “This is what A·hithʹo·phel has advised Abʹsa·lom and the elders of Israel, and this is what I have advised.
16 Now quickly send word to David and warn him: ‘Do not stay at the fords of the wilderness tonight, but cross over without fail, or the king and all the people with him may be wiped out.’”
17 Jonʹa·than and A·himʹa·az were staying at En-roʹgel; so a servant girl went off and told them and they went to tell King David, for they did not dare to be seen entering the city.
18 However, a young man saw them and told Abʹsa·lom. So the two of them quickly went off and came to the house of a man in Ba·huʹrim who had a well in his courtyard. They went down into it,
19 and the man’s wife spread a covering over the top of the well and covered it with cracked grain; no one knew about it.
20 The servants of Abʹsa·lom came to the woman at her house and asked: “Where are A·himʹa·az and Jonʹa·than?” The woman replied: “They passed by toward the water.” Then the men searched for them but did not find them, so they returned to Jerusalem.
21 After the men were gone, they came up out of the well and went and informed King David. They said to him: “Rise up and quickly cross the water, for this is what A·hithʹo·phel advised against you.”
22 Immediately David and all the people with him rose up and crossed the Jordan. By daybreak, there was no one left who had not crossed the Jordan.
23 When A·hithʹo·phel saw that his advice had not been acted on, he saddled a donkey and went to his house in his hometown. After he gave instructions to his household, he hanged himself. So he died and was buried in the burial place of his forefathers.
24 Meanwhile, David went to Ma·ha·naʹim, and Abʹsa·lom crossed the Jordan with all the men of Israel.
25 Abʹsa·lom put A·maʹsa in charge of the army in place of Joʹab; A·maʹsa was the son of a man named Ithʹra the Israelite, who had relations with Abʹi·gail the daughter of Naʹhash, the sister of Ze·ruʹiah, Joʹab’s mother.
26 Israel and Abʹsa·lom camped in the land of Gilʹe·ad.
27 As soon as David came to Ma·ha·naʹim, Shoʹbi the son of Naʹhash from Rabʹbah of the Amʹmon·ites, Maʹchir the son of Amʹmi·el from Lo-deʹbar, and Bar·zilʹlai the Gilʹe·ad·ite from Ro·geʹlim
28 brought beds, basins, clay pots, wheat, barley, flour, roasted grain, broad beans, lentils, parched grain,
29 honey, butter, sheep, and cheese. They brought all of this out for David and the people with him to eat, for they said: “The people are hungry and tired and thirsty in the wilderness.”
18 Then David numbered the men who were with him and placed over them chiefs of thousands and chiefs of hundreds.
2 And David sent one third of the men under the command of Joʹab, one third under the command of Joʹab’s brother A·bishʹai the son of Ze·ruʹiah, and one third under the command of Itʹtai the Gitʹtite. The king then said to the men: “I will also go out with you.”
3 But they said: “You must not go out, for if we flee, they would not care about us; and if half of us would die, they would not care about us, because you are worth 10,000 of us. Therefore, it would be better if you would send us help from the city.”
4 The king said to them: “Whatever seems best to you, I will do.” So the king stood next to the city gate, and all the men went out by hundreds and by thousands.
5 Then the king gave Joʹab and A·bishʹai and Itʹtai this order: “Deal gently with the young man Abʹsa·lom for my sake.” All the men heard it when the king gave all the chiefs the order about Abʹsa·lom.
6 The men went out to the field to meet Israel, and the battle took place in the forest of Eʹphra·im.
7 There the people of Israel were defeated by the servants of David, and a great slaughter took place on that day—20,000 men.
8 The battle spread through the whole region. Furthermore, the forest devoured more of the people than the sword did on that day.
9 Abʹsa·lom eventually found himself facing the servants of David. Abʹsa·lom was riding on a mule, and the mule went under the thick branches of a large tree, and his head got entangled in the big tree, so that he was suspended in midair while the mule he had been riding kept going.
10 Then someone saw it and told Joʹab: “Look! I have seen Abʹsa·lom hanging in a big tree.”
11 Joʹab replied to the man who told him: “If you saw it, why did you not strike him down to the ground on the spot? Then I would have gladly given you ten pieces of silver and a belt.”
12 But the man said to Joʹab: “Even if I were handed 1,000 pieces of silver, I could not lift my hand against the king’s son, for we heard the king order you and A·bishʹai and Itʹtai, ‘Whoever you are, watch over the young man Abʹsa·lom.’
13 If I had disobeyed and taken his life, it could never have remained hidden from the king, and you would not have protected me.”
14 To this Joʹab said: “I am not going to waste any more time with you!” So he took three spikes in his hand and drove them through the heart of Abʹsa·lom while he was still alive in the midst of the big tree.
15 Then ten attendants who carried Joʹab’s weapons came and struck Abʹsa·lom until he was dead.
16 Joʹab now blew the horn, and the men returned from chasing after Israel; Joʹab called for them to halt.
17 They took Abʹsa·lom and threw him into a big pit in the forest and piled up over him a very big heap of stones. And all Israel fled to their homes.
18 Now Abʹsa·lom, while he was alive, had taken and set up for himself a pillar in the Valley of the King, for he said: “I have no son to preserve the memory of my name.” So he named the pillar after himself, and it is called Abʹsa·lom’s Monument to this day.
19 A·himʹa·az the son of Zaʹdok said: “Let me run, please, and break the news to the king, for Jehovah has given him justice by freeing him from his enemies.”
20 But Joʹab said to him: “You will not be a bearer of news this day. You may break the news on another day, but today you will not break the news, because the king’s own son has died.”
21 Then Joʹab said to a Cushʹite: “Go, tell the king what you have seen.” At that the Cushʹite bowed to Joʹab and ran off.
22 A·himʹa·az the son of Zaʹdok said once again to Joʹab: “Whatever happens, please let me also run behind the Cushʹite.” However, Joʹab said: “Why should you run, my son, when there is no news for you to tell?”
23 Still he said: “Whatever happens, let me run.” So Joʹab said to him: “Run!” And A·himʹa·az ran by the way of the district of the Jordan, and he eventually overtook the Cushʹite.
24 Now David was sitting between the two city gates, and the watchman went up to the roof of the gate by the wall. He looked up and saw a man running by himself.
25 So the watchman called out and told the king. The king said: “If he is by himself, he has news to tell.” As he came steadily nearer,
26 the watchman saw another man running. The watchman then called to the gatekeeper: “Look! Another man running by himself!” The king said: “This one is also bringing news.”
27 The watchman said: “I can see that the first man runs like A·himʹa·az the son of Zaʹdok,” so the king said: “He is a good man, and he comes with good news.”
28 A·himʹa·az then called out to the king: “All is well!” With that he bowed to the king with his face to the ground. Then he said: “May Jehovah your God be praised, who has surrendered the men who rebelled against my lord the king!”
29 However, the king said: “Is everything all right with the young man Abʹsa·lom?” To this A·himʹa·az said: “I saw the great commotion when Joʹab sent the king’s servant and your servant, but I did not know what it was.”
30 So the king said: “Step aside, stand here.” At that he stepped aside and stood there.
31 Then the Cushʹite arrived, and the Cushʹite said: “Let my lord the king accept this news: Today Jehovah has brought justice by freeing you from the hand of all those who rebelled against you.”
32 But the king said to the Cushʹite: “Is everything all right with the young man Abʹsa·lom?” To this the Cushʹite said: “May all the enemies of my lord the king and all those who rebelled against you to harm you become like the young man!”
33 This disturbed the king, and he went up to the roof chamber over the gateway and wept, saying as he walked: “My son Abʹsa·lom, my son, my son Abʹsa·lom! If only I had died instead of you, Abʹsa·lom my son, my son!”
20 Now there was a troublemaker named Sheʹba the son of Bichʹri, a Benʹja·min·ite. He blew the horn and said: “We have no share in David, and we have no inheritance in the son of Jesʹse. Everyone to his gods, O Israel!”
2 At that all the men of Israel quit following David to follow Sheʹba the son of Bichʹri; but the men of Judah stuck to their king, from the Jordan to Jerusalem.
3 When David came to his house at Jerusalem, the king took the ten concubines he had left behind to take care of the house, and he put them in a house under guard. He supplied food to them, but he did not have any relations with them. They remained in confinement until the day of their death, living as if they were widows, even though they had a living husband.
4 The king now said to A·maʹsa: “Call the men of Judah together to me within three days, and you also should be here.”
5 So A·maʹsa went to call Judah together, but he came later than the set time that had been appointed for him.
6 Then David said to A·bishʹai: “Sheʹba the son of Bichʹri may do us more harm than Abʹsa·lom did. Take the servants of your lord and chase after him, so that he may not find fortified cities and escape from us.”
7 So the men of Joʹab, the Cherʹe·thites, the Pelʹe·thites, and all the mighty men went out after him; they left Jerusalem to chase after Sheʹba the son of Bichʹri.
8 When they were near the great stone in Gibʹe·on, A·maʹsa came to meet them. Now Joʹab was wearing his battle clothing, and he had a sword in its sheath strapped to his hip. When he stepped forward, the sword fell out.
9 Joʹab said to A·maʹsa: “Are you all right, my brother?” Then with his right hand, Joʹab took hold of A·maʹsa’s beard as if to kiss him.
10 A·maʹsa was not on guard against the sword that was in Joʹab’s hand, and Joʹab stabbed him with it in the abdomen, and his intestines spilled out on the ground. He did not have to stab him again; once was enough to kill him. Then Joʹab and his brother A·bishʹai chased after Sheʹba the son of Bichʹri.
11 One of Joʹab’s young men stood by him and was saying: “Whoever is on Joʹab’s side and whoever belongs to David, let him follow Joʹab!”
12 All the while A·maʹsa was wallowing in his blood in the middle of the road. When the man saw that all the people were stopping, he moved A·maʹsa from the road to the field. Then he threw a garment over him, because he saw that everyone was stopping when they came up to him.
13 After he had removed him from the road, all the men followed Joʹab to chase after Sheʹba the son of Bichʹri.
14 Sheʹba passed through all the tribes of Israel to Abel of Beth-maʹa·cah. The Bichʹrites gathered together and also went in after him.
15 Joʹab and his men came and besieged him in Abel of Beth-maʹa·cah and raised up a siege rampart against the city, as it was standing within a rampart. And all the men with Joʹab were undermining the wall to knock it down.
16 And a wise woman called out from the city: “Listen, men, listen! Please tell Joʹab, ‘Come here, and let me speak to you.’”
17 So he went near to her, and the woman said: “Are you Joʹab?” He replied: “I am.” At this she said to him: “Listen to the words of your servant.” He said: “I am listening.”
18 She continued: “They would always say in the past, ‘Let them inquire in Abel, and that was the end of the matter.’
19 I represent the peaceable and faithful ones of Israel. You are seeking to destroy a city that is like a mother in Israel. Why should you do away with the inheritance of Jehovah?”
20 Joʹab answered: “It is unthinkable for me to do away with it and destroy it.
21 That is not the case at all. Rather, a man named Sheʹba the son of Bichʹri from the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im has rebelled against King David. If you hand over this one man, I will withdraw from the city.” Then the woman said to Joʹab: “Look! His head will be thrown over the wall to you!”
22 At once the wise woman went in to all the people, and they cut off the head of Sheʹba the son of Bichʹri and threw it to Joʹab. At that he blew the horn, and they dispersed from the city, each one to his home; and Joʹab returned to Jerusalem to the king.
23 Now Joʹab was in charge of all the army of Israel; Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da was over the Cherʹe·thites and the Pelʹe·thites.
24 A·doʹram was over those conscripted for forced labor; Je·hoshʹa·phat the son of A·hiʹlud was the recorder.
25 Sheʹva was the secretary; Zaʹdok and A·biʹa·thar were priests.
26 And Iʹra the Jaʹir·ite also became a chief minister for David.
22 And David spoke to Jehovah the words of this song in the day that Jehovah rescued him out of the hand of all his enemies and out of Saul’s hand.
2 He said: “Jehovah is my crag and my stronghold and the One who rescues me.
3 My God is my rock, in whom I take refuge, My shield and my horn of salvation, my secure refuge And my place to flee, my savior; you who save me from violence.
4 I call on Jehovah, who is worthy of praise, And I will be saved from my enemies.
5 The waves of death broke all around me; Flash floods of worthless men terrified me.
6 The ropes of the Grave surrounded me; The snares of death confronted me.
7 In my distress I called on Jehovah, To my God I kept calling. Then from his temple he heard my voice, And my cry for help reached his ears.
8 Back and forth the earth began to shake and rock; The foundations of the heavens trembled And shook back and forth because he had been angered.
9 Smoke ascended from his nostrils, And a consuming fire came from his mouth; Glowing coals blazed from him.
10 He made the heavens bend as he descended, And thick gloom was beneath his feet.
11 He rode on a cherub and came flying. He was visible on the wings of a spirit.
12 Then he put darkness around him as a shelter, In dark waters and thick clouds.
13 From the brightness before him fiery coals blazed.
14 Then Jehovah began to thunder from heaven; The Most High made his voice heard.
15 He shot his arrows and scattered them; Lightning, and he threw them into confusion.
16 The bed of the sea became visible; The foundations of the land were exposed by the rebuke of Jehovah, By the blast of the breath from his nostrils.
17 He reached down from on high; He took hold of me and pulled me from deep waters.
18 He rescued me from my strong enemy, From those hating me, who were stronger than I was.
19 They confronted me on the day of my disaster, But Jehovah was my support.
20 He brought me out into a place of safety; He rescued me because he was pleased with me.
21 Jehovah rewards me according to my righteousness; He repays me according to the innocence of my hands.
22 For I have kept the ways of Jehovah, And I have not wickedly abandoned my God.
23 All his judgments are before me; I will not deviate from his statutes.
24 I will remain blameless before him, And I will keep myself from error.
25 May Jehovah repay me according to my righteousness, According to my innocence before him.
26 With someone loyal you act in loyalty; With the blameless, mighty man, you deal blamelessly;
27 With the pure you show yourself pure, But with the crooked you show yourself shrewd.
28 For you save those who are humble, But your eyes are against the haughty, and you abase them.
29 For you are my lamp, O Jehovah; It is Jehovah who lights up my darkness.
30 With your help I can charge against a marauder band; By God’s power I can scale a wall.
31 The way of the true God is perfect; The saying of Jehovah is refined. He is a shield to all those taking refuge in him.
32 For who is a God besides Jehovah? And who is a rock except our God?
33 The true God is my strong fortress, And he will make my way perfect.
34 He makes my feet like those of a deer; He makes me stand on high places.
35 He trains my hands for warfare; My arms can bend a bow of copper.
36 You give me your shield of salvation, And your humility makes me great.
37 You widen the path for my footsteps; My feet will not slip.
38 I will pursue my enemies and annihilate them; I will not return until they are wiped out.
39 And I will wipe them out and crush them, so that they will not rise up; They will fall under my feet.
40 You will equip me with strength for the battle; You will make my foes collapse under me.
41 You will make my enemies retreat from me; I will put an end to those who hate me.
42 They cry for help, but there is no one to save them; They even cry to Jehovah, but he does not answer them.
43 I will pound them as fine as the dust of the earth; I will pulverize and trample them like mud in the streets.
44 You will rescue me from the faultfinding of my people. You will safeguard me to be the head of nations; A people whom I have not known will serve me.
45 Foreigners will come cringing before me; What they hear about me will make them obey me.
46 Foreigners will lose courage; They will come trembling from their strongholds.
47 Jehovah is alive! Praised be my Rock! Let the God of the rock of my salvation be exalted.
48 The true God executes vengeance for me; He subdues the peoples under me;
49 He rescues me from my enemies. You lift me high above those who attack me; You save me from the man of violence.
50 That is why I will thank you, O Jehovah, among the nations, And to your name I will sing praises:
51 He performs great acts of salvation for his king; He displays loyal love to his anointed one, To David and his offspring forever.”
3 Solʹo·mon made a marriage alliance with Pharʹaoh king of Egypt. He married Pharʹaoh’s daughter and brought her to the City of David until he finished building his own house, and the house of Jehovah, and the wall around Jerusalem.
2 But the people were still sacrificing on the high places, because until that time a house for the name of Jehovah had not yet been built.
3 Solʹo·mon continued to love Jehovah by walking in the statutes of David his father, except that he was sacrificing and making offerings smoke on the high places.
4 The king went to Gibʹe·on to sacrifice there, for that was the most prominent high place. Solʹo·mon offered 1,000 burnt sacrifices on that altar.
5 In Gibʹe·on Jehovah appeared to Solʹo·mon in a dream by night, and God said: “Ask what you would like me to give you.”
6 At this Solʹo·mon said: “You have shown great loyal love toward your servant David my father as he walked before you in faithfulness and in righteousness and in uprightness of heart. You have continued to show him this great loyal love down to this day by giving him a son to sit on his throne.
7 And now, Jehovah my God, you have made your servant king in the place of David my father, though I am just a youth and I am inexperienced.
8 Your servant is among your people whom you have chosen, a people so vast that they cannot be numbered or counted.
9 So grant your servant an obedient heart to judge your people, to discern between good and bad, for who is able to judge this numerous people of yours?”
10 It was pleasing to Jehovah that Solʹo·mon had requested this.
11 God then said to him: “Because you requested this and you did not request for yourself long life or riches or the death of your enemies, but you requested understanding to hear judicial cases,
12 I will do what you asked. I will give you a wise and understanding heart, so that just as there has never been anyone like you before, there will never be anyone like you again.
13 Furthermore, what you have not requested I will give you, both riches and glory, so that there will be no other king like you in your lifetime.
14 And if you walk in my ways by keeping my regulations and my commandments, just as David your father walked, I will also give you a long life.”
15 When Solʹo·mon awoke, he realized that it had been a dream. Then he went to Jerusalem and stood before the ark of the covenant of Jehovah and offered up burnt sacrifices and communion offerings and spread a feast for all his servants.
16 At that time two prostitutes came in to the king and stood before him.
17 The first woman said: “Please, my lord, this woman and I live in one house, and I gave birth while she was in the house.
18 On the third day after I gave birth, this woman also gave birth. We were together, just the two of us; there was no one else with us in the house.
19 During the night this woman’s son died, because she lay on him.
20 So she got up in the middle of the night and took my son from my side while your slave girl was asleep and laid him in her arms, and she laid her dead son in my arms.
21 When I got up in the morning to nurse my son, I saw that he was dead. So I examined him closely in the morning and saw that it was not my son whom I had given birth to.”
22 But the other woman said: “No, my son is the living one, and your son is the dead one!” But the first woman was saying: “No, your son is the dead one, and my son is the living one.” That is how they argued before the king.
23 Finally the king said: “This one says, ‘This is my son, the living one, and your son is the dead one!’ and that one says, ‘No, your son is the dead one, and my son is the living one!’”
24 The king said: “Bring me a sword.” So they brought a sword to the king.
25 The king then said: “Cut the living child in two, and give half to one woman and half to the other.”
26 At once the woman whose son was the living one pleaded with the king, for her compassions were stirred toward her son. She said: “Please, my lord! You should give her the living child! By no means put him to death!” But the other woman was saying: “He will be neither mine nor yours! Let them cut him in two!”
27 At that the king answered: “Give the living child to the first woman! By no means put him to death, for she is his mother.”
28 So all Israel heard about the judgment that the king had handed down, and they were in awe of the king, for they saw that the wisdom of God was with him to execute justice.
12 Re·ho·boʹam went to Sheʹchem, for all Israel had come to Sheʹchem to make him king.
2 As soon as Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat heard of it (he was still in Egypt because he had run off on account of King Solʹo·mon and was living in Egypt),
3 they sent for him. After that Jer·o·boʹam and all the congregation of Israel came to Re·ho·boʹam and said:
4 “Your father made our yoke harsh. But if you make the harsh service of your father easier and you lighten the heavy yoke he put on us, we will serve you.”
5 At this he said to them: “Go away for three days; then return to me.” So the people went away.
6 King Re·ho·boʹam then consulted with the older men who had served his father Solʹo·mon while he was alive, saying: “What advice would you give on how to reply to this people?”
7 They answered him: “If today you would become a servant to this people and submit to their request and give them a favorable answer, they will always be your servants.”
8 However, he rejected the advice that the older men gave him, and he consulted with the young men who had grown up with him and who were now his attendants.
9 He asked them: “What advice do you offer on how we should reply to this people who have said to me, ‘Make the yoke your father put on us lighter’?”
10 The young men who had grown up with him said to him: “This is what you should say to this people who have said to you, ‘Your father made our yoke heavy, but you should make it lighter for us’; this is what you should tell them, ‘My little finger will be thicker than my father’s hips.
11 My father imposed a heavy yoke on you, but I will add to your yoke. My father punished you with whips, but I will punish you with scourges.’”
12 Jer·o·boʹam and all the people came to Re·ho·boʹam on the third day, just as the king had said: “Return to me on the third day.”
13 But the king answered the people harshly, rejecting the advice that the older men had given him.
14 He spoke to them according to the advice of the young men, saying: “My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add to your yoke. My father punished you with whips, but I will punish you with scourges.”
15 So the king did not listen to the people, for this turn of events was caused by Jehovah, in order to carry out the word that Jehovah had spoken through A·hiʹjah the Shiʹlo·nite to Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat.
16 When all Israel saw that the king refused to listen to them, the people replied to the king: “What share do we have in David? We have no inheritance in the son of Jesʹse. To your gods, O Israel. Now look after your own house, O David!” With that Israel returned to their homes.
17 But Re·ho·boʹam continued to reign over the Israelites living in the cities of Judah.
18 Then King Re·ho·boʹam sent A·doʹram, who was in charge of those conscripted for forced labor, but all Israel stoned him to death. King Re·ho·boʹam managed to mount his chariot to flee to Jerusalem.
19 And the Israelites have been in revolt against the house of David down to this day.
20 As soon as all Israel heard that Jer·o·boʹam had returned, they summoned him to the assembly and made him king over all Israel. None of the people followed the house of David except the tribe of Judah.
21 When Re·ho·boʹam arrived in Jerusalem, he immediately congregated all the house of Judah and the tribe of Benjamin, 180,000 trained warriors, to fight against the house of Israel in order to restore the kingship to Re·ho·boʹam the son of Solʹo·mon.
22 Then the word of the true God came to She·maiʹah the man of the true God, saying:
23 “Say to Re·ho·boʹam the son of Solʹo·mon the king of Judah and to all the house of Judah and Benjamin and the rest of the people,
24 ‘This is what Jehovah says: “You must not go up and fight against your Israelite brothers. Each one of you must return to his house, for I have caused this to happen.”’” So they obeyed the word of Jehovah and went back home, as Jehovah had told them.
25 Jer·o·boʹam then built up Sheʹchem in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im and lived there. From there he went out and built up Pe·nuʹel.
26 Jer·o·boʹam said in his heart: “Now the kingdom will return to the house of David.
27 If this people continues to go up to offer sacrifices at the house of Jehovah in Jerusalem, the heart of this people will also return to their lord, King Re·ho·boʹam of Judah. Yes, they will kill me and return to King Re·ho·boʹam of Judah.”
28 After consultation, the king made two golden calves and said to the people: “It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem. Here is your God, O Israel, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt.”
29 Then he placed one in Bethʹel, and the other he put in Dan.
30 And this caused them to sin, and the people went as far as Dan to worship the one there.
31 And he made houses of worship on the high places and appointed priests from the people in general, those who were not Levites.
32 Jer·o·boʹam also established a festival in the eighth month, on the 15th day of the month, like the festival in Judah. On the altar that he made at Bethʹel, he sacrificed to the calves he had made, and at Bethʹel he assigned priests for the high places that he had made.
33 And he began to make offerings on the altar that he had made at Bethʹel on the 15th day in the eighth month, in the month that he had devised on his own; and he established a festival for the people of Israel, and he ascended the altar to make offerings and sacrificial smoke.
13 By the word of Jehovah, a man of God came from Judah to Bethʹel while Jer·o·boʹam was standing by the altar to make sacrificial smoke.
2 Then he called out against the altar by the word of Jehovah and said: “O altar, altar! This is what Jehovah says: ‘Look! A son named Jo·siʹah will be born to the house of David! He will sacrifice on you the priests of the high places, those making sacrificial smoke on you, and he will burn human bones on you.’”
3 He gave a sign on that day, saying: “This is the sign that Jehovah has declared: Look! The altar will be ripped apart, and the ashes that are on it will be spilled out.”
4 As soon as the king heard the word that the man of the true God had called out against the altar at Bethʹel, Jer·o·boʹam stretched out his hand from the altar and said: “Seize him!” Immediately, the hand that he had stretched out against him dried up, and he could not draw it back.
5 Then the altar was ripped apart and the ashes were spilled out from the altar according to the sign that the man of the true God had given by the word of Jehovah.
6 The king now said to the man of the true God: “Please, beg for the favor of Jehovah your God, and pray in my behalf that my hand may be restored to me.” At this the man of the true God begged for the favor of Jehovah, and the king’s hand was restored to its former condition.
7 The king then said to the man of the true God: “Come home with me and take some food, and let me give you a gift.”
8 But the man of the true God said to the king: “Even if you gave me half your house, I would not come with you and eat bread or drink water in this place.
9 For this is what I was commanded by the word of Jehovah: ‘You must not eat bread or drink water, and you must not return by the way you came.’”
10 So he left by another way, and he did not return by the way he had come to Bethʹel.
11 There was a certain old prophet dwelling in Bethʹel, and his sons came home and related to him all the things that the man of the true God had done that day in Bethʹel and the words he had spoken to the king. After they related this to their father,
12 their father asked them: “Which way did he go?” So his sons showed him the way that the man of the true God from Judah had gone.
13 He now said to his sons: “Saddle the donkey for me.” They saddled the donkey for him, and he mounted it.
14 He followed the man of the true God and found him sitting under a big tree. Then he said to him: “Are you the man of the true God who came from Judah?” He replied: “I am.”
15 He said to him: “Come home with me and eat bread.”
16 But he said: “I cannot go back with you or accept your invitation, nor may I eat bread or drink water with you in this place.
17 For I was told by the word of Jehovah, ‘You must not eat bread or drink water there. You must not return by the way you came.’”
18 At this he said to him: “I too am a prophet like you, and an angel told me by the word of Jehovah, ‘Have him come back with you to your house so that he may eat bread and drink water.’” (He deceived him.)
19 So he went back with him to eat bread and drink water in his house.
20 While they were sitting at the table, the word of Jehovah came to the prophet who had brought him back,
21 and he called out to the man of the true God from Judah, saying, “This is what Jehovah says: ‘Because you rebelled against the order of Jehovah and did not keep the commandment that Jehovah your God gave you,
22 but you went back to eat bread and drink water in the place about which you were told, “Do not eat bread or drink water,” your dead body will not come into the tomb of your forefathers.’”
23 After the man of the true God ate bread and drank, the old prophet saddled the donkey for the prophet whom he had brought back.
24 Then he got on his way, but a lion came across him on the road and killed him. His dead body was thrown onto the road, and the donkey stood beside it; the lion was also standing beside the dead body.
25 There were men passing by who saw the dead body thrown onto the road and the lion standing beside the dead body. They came in and told about it in the city where the old prophet lived.
26 When the prophet who had brought him back from the road heard of it, he immediately said: “It is the man of the true God who rebelled against the order of Jehovah; so Jehovah gave him over to the lion, to maul and to kill him, according to the word of Jehovah that he spoke to him.”
27 He then said to his sons: “Saddle the donkey for me.” So they saddled it.
28 Then he went on his way and found the dead body thrown onto the road, with the donkey and the lion standing beside it. The lion had not eaten the dead body, nor had it mauled the donkey.
29 The prophet lifted up the dead body of the man of the true God and put him on the donkey, and he brought him back into his own city to mourn and bury him.
30 So he laid the dead body in his own tomb, and they kept crying out over him: “Too bad, my brother!”
31 After burying him, he told his sons: “When I die, you must bury me in the place where the man of the true God is buried. Lay my bones next to his bones.
32 The word that he called out by the word of Jehovah against the altar in Bethʹel and against all the houses of worship on the high places in the cities of Sa·marʹi·a is sure to take place.”
33 Even after this happened, Jer·o·boʹam did not turn back from his bad way, but he kept appointing priests for the high places from the people in general. He would install as priests anyone who so desired, saying: “Let him become one of the priests for the high places.”
34 This sin on the part of the household of Jer·o·boʹam led to their destruction and annihilation from the face of the earth.
17 Now E·liʹjah the Tishʹbite, an inhabitant of Gilʹe·ad, said to Aʹhab: “As surely as Jehovah the God of Israel whom I serve is living, during these years there will be no dew or rain except by my word!”
2 The word of Jehovah came to him, saying:
3 “Leave here, and turn eastward and hide at the Valley of Cheʹrith, east of the Jordan.
4 You should drink from the stream, and I will command the ravens to supply you food there.”
5 He immediately went and did according to the word of Jehovah; he went and stayed by the Valley of Cheʹrith, east of the Jordan.
6 And the ravens were bringing him bread and meat in the morning and bread and meat in the evening, and he drank from the stream.
7 But after some days, the stream ran dry, because there was no rain in the land.
8 The word of Jehovah then came to him:
9 “Rise up, go to Zarʹe·phath, which belongs to Siʹdon, and stay there. Look! I will command a widow there to supply you with food.”
10 So he rose up and went to Zarʹe·phath. When he came to the entrance of the city, there was a widow gathering pieces of wood. So he called to her and said: “Please, bring me a little water in a cup so that I may drink.”
11 As she went to get it, he called to her: “Please, bring me a piece of bread in your hand.”
12 At this she said: “As surely as Jehovah your God is living, I have no bread, only a handful of flour in the large jar and a little oil in the small jar. Now I am gathering a few pieces of wood, and I will go in and make something for me and my son. After we have eaten, we will die.”
13 Then E·liʹjah said to her: “Do not be afraid. Go in and do as you said. But first make me a small round loaf of bread with what is there, and bring it out to me. Then you can make something afterward for you and your son.
14 For this is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: ‘The large jar of flour will not run out, and the small jar of oil will not run dry until the day Jehovah makes it rain on the surface of the ground.’”
15 So she went and did as E·liʹjah said, and she together with him and her household ate for many days.
16 The large jar of flour did not run out, and the small jar of oil did not run dry, according to Jehovah’s word that he had spoken through E·liʹjah.
17 After these things, the son of the woman who owned the house fell sick, and his sickness became so severe that he stopped breathing.
18 At this she said to E·liʹjah: “What do you have against me, O man of the true God? Have you come to remind me of my guilt and to put my son to death?”
19 But he said to her: “Give me your son.” Then he took him from her arms and carried him up to the roof chamber, where he was staying, and he laid him on his own bed.
20 He called out to Jehovah: “O Jehovah my God, are you also bringing harm to the widow with whom I am staying by putting her son to death?”
21 Then he stretched himself out over the child three times and called out to Jehovah: “O Jehovah my God, please, let this child’s life come back into him.”
22 Jehovah listened to E·liʹjah’s request, and the life of the child came back into him, and he revived.
23 E·liʹjah took the child and brought him down from the roof chamber into the house and gave him to his mother; and E·liʹjah said: “See, your son is alive.”
24 At that the woman said to E·liʹjah: “Now I know that you truly are a man of God and that Jehovah’s word in your mouth is truth.”
21 After these things, an incident took place concerning a vineyard that belonged to Naʹboth the Jezʹre·el·ite; it was in Jezʹre·el, next to the palace of Aʹhab the king of Sa·marʹi·a.
2 Aʹhab said to Naʹboth: “Give me your vineyard for me to use as a vegetable garden, for it is near my house. Then I will give you a better vineyard to replace it. Or if you prefer, I will give you its value in money.”
3 But Naʹboth said to Aʹhab: “It is unthinkable, from Jehovah’s standpoint, for me to give you the inheritance of my forefathers.”
4 So Aʹhab came into his house, sullen and dejected over the answer that Naʹboth the Jezʹre·el·ite had given him when he said: “I will not give you the inheritance of my forefathers.” Then he lay down on his bed, kept his face turned away, and refused to eat.
5 His wife Jezʹe·bel came in to him and asked him: “Why are you so sad that you refuse to eat?”
6 He replied to her: “Because I said to Naʹboth the Jezʹre·el·ite, ‘Give me your vineyard for money. Or if you prefer, let me give you another vineyard to replace it.’ But he said, ‘I will not give you my vineyard.’”
7 His wife Jezʹe·bel said to him: “Are you not the one ruling as king over Israel? Get up, eat something, and let your heart be cheerful. I will give you the vineyard of Naʹboth the Jezʹre·el·ite.”
8 So she wrote letters in Aʹhab’s name and sealed them with his seal and sent the letters to the elders and the nobles who lived in Naʹboth’s city.
9 She wrote in the letters: “Proclaim a fast, and have Naʹboth sit at the head of the people.
10 And have two good-for-nothing men sit in front of him and testify against him, saying, ‘You have cursed God and the king!’ Then bring him out and stone him to death.”
11 So the men of his city, the elders and the nobles who lived in his city, did just as was written in the letters that Jezʹe·bel sent to them.
12 They proclaimed a fast and had Naʹboth sit at the head of the people.
13 Then two of the good-for-nothing men came in and sat down in front of him and began to testify against Naʹboth in front of the people, saying: “Naʹboth has cursed God and the king!” After that they brought him to the outskirts of the city and stoned him to death.
14 They now sent word to Jezʹe·bel, saying: “Naʹboth has been stoned to death.”
15 As soon as Jezʹe·bel heard that Naʹboth had been stoned to death, she said to Aʹhab: “Get up, take possession of the vineyard of Naʹboth the Jezʹre·el·ite, which he refused to give you for money, for Naʹboth is no longer alive. He is dead.”
16 As soon as Aʹhab heard that Naʹboth was dead, Aʹhab got up to go down to the vineyard of Naʹboth the Jezʹre·el·ite to take possession of it.
17 But Jehovah’s word came to E·liʹjah the Tishʹbite, saying:
18 “Get up, go down to meet Aʹhab the king of Israel, who is in Sa·marʹi·a. There he is in the vineyard of Naʹboth, where he has gone to take possession of it.
19 You must tell him, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Have you murdered a man and also taken his property?”’ Then say to him, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “In the place where the dogs licked up the blood of Naʹboth, the dogs will lick up your own blood.”’”
20 Aʹhab said to E·liʹjah: “So you have found me, O my enemy!” He replied: “I have found you. ‘Because you are determined to do what is bad in the eyes of Jehovah,
21 here I am bringing calamity upon you, and I will make a clean sweep after you and will annihilate from Aʹhab every male, including the helpless and weak in Israel.
22 And I will make your house like the house of Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat and like the house of Baʹa·sha the son of A·hiʹjah, for you have provoked my anger and have caused Israel to sin.’
23 Also concerning Jezʹe·bel, Jehovah has said: ‘The dogs will eat up Jezʹe·bel in the plot of land of Jezʹre·el.
24 Anyone belonging to Aʹhab who dies in the city the dogs will eat up, and anyone who dies in the field the birds of the heavens will eat up.
25 Indeed, there has never been anyone like Aʹhab, who was so determined to do what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah, egged on by his wife Jezʹe·bel.
26 He acted in the most detestable way by going after the disgusting idols, just as all the Amʹor·ites had done, whom Jehovah drove out from before the Israelites.’”
27 As soon as Aʹhab heard these words, he ripped his garments apart and put sackcloth on his body; and he went on a fast and kept lying down in sackcloth and walking despondently.
28 Jehovah’s word then came to E·liʹjah the Tishʹbite:
29 “Have you seen how Aʹhab has humbled himself on my account? Because he has humbled himself before me, I will not bring the calamity during his lifetime. I will bring the calamity upon his house in the days of his son.”
5 Now Naʹa·man the army chief of the king of Syria was a prominent man who was held in esteem by his lord, because through him Jehovah had given victory to Syria. He was a mighty warrior, although he was a leper.
2 On one of their raids, the Syrians had taken captive from the land of Israel a little girl who became a servant to Naʹa·man’s wife.
3 She said to her mistress: “If only my lord would visit the prophet in Sa·marʹi·a! Then he would cure him of his leprosy.”
4 So he went and reported to his lord, telling him what the girl from Israel had said.
5 Then the king of Syria said: “Go now! And I will send a letter to the king of Israel.” So he went, taking with him ten talents of silver, 6,000 pieces of gold, and ten changes of garments.
6 He brought to the king of Israel the letter, which read: “Along with this letter that has come to you, I send my servant Naʹa·man so that you may cure him of his leprosy.”
7 As soon as the king of Israel read the letter, he ripped his garments apart and said: “Am I God, to put to death and to keep alive? For he is sending this man to me, telling me to cure him of his leprosy! You can see for yourselves that he is seeking a quarrel with me.”
8 But when E·liʹsha the man of the true God heard that the king of Israel had ripped his garments apart, he at once sent word to the king: “Why did you rip your garments apart? Please let him come to me so that he may know that there is a prophet in Israel.”
9 So Naʹa·man came with his horses and his war chariots and stood at the entrance of the house of E·liʹsha.
10 However, E·liʹsha sent a messenger to tell him: “Go, wash seven times in the Jordan, and your flesh will be restored, and you will be clean.”
11 At this Naʹa·man became indignant and started to leave, saying: “Here I said to myself, ‘He will come out to me and stand here and call on the name of Jehovah his God, moving his hand back and forth over the leprosy to cure it.’
12 Are not the A·baʹnah and the Pharʹpar, the rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? Can I not wash in them and become clean?” With that he turned and went away in a rage.
13 His servants now approached him and said: “My father, if the prophet had told you to do something extraordinary, would you not do it? How much more, then, since he only said to you, ‘Wash and be clean’?”
14 At that he went down and plunged into the Jordan seven times, according to the word of the man of the true God. Then his flesh was restored like the flesh of a little boy, and he became clean.
15 After that he went back to the man of the true God, he and all his entourage, and he stood before him and said: “Now I know that there is no God anywhere in all the earth but in Israel. Now accept, please, a gift from your servant.”
16 However, E·liʹsha said: “As surely as Jehovah whom I serve is living, I will not accept it.” He urged him to accept it, but he kept refusing.
17 Finally Naʹa·man said: “If not, please, let your servant be given two mule-loads of soil from this land, for your servant will no longer offer a burnt offering or a sacrifice to any gods other than Jehovah.
18 But may Jehovah forgive your servant for this one thing: When my lord goes into the house of Rimʹmon to bow down there, he supports himself on my arm, so I have to bow down at the house of Rimʹmon. When I bow down at the house of Rimʹmon, may Jehovah, please, forgive your servant for this.”
19 At this he said to him: “Go in peace.” After he departed from him and had traveled for some distance,
20 Ge·haʹzi the attendant of E·liʹsha the man of the true God said to himself: ‘Here my master has spared this Syrian Naʹa·man by not accepting from him what he brought. As surely as Jehovah is living, I will run after him and take something from him.’
21 So Ge·haʹzi chased after Naʹa·man. When Naʹa·man saw someone running after him, he got down from his chariot to meet him and said: “Is everything all right?”
22 To this he said: “All is well. My master has sent me, saying, ‘Look! Just now two young men from the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im from the sons of the prophets came to me. Give them, please, a talent of silver and two changes of garments.’”
23 Naʹa·man said: “Go on, take two talents.” He kept urging him, and he wrapped up two talents of silver in two bags, with two changes of garments, and gave them to two of his attendants, who carried them before him.
24 When he reached Oʹphel, he took them from their hand and put them in the house and sent the men away. After they left,
25 he went in and stood by his master. E·liʹsha now said to him: “Where did you come from, Ge·haʹzi?” But he said: “Your servant did not go anywhere.”
26 E·liʹsha said to him: “Was my heart not there with you when the man got down from his chariot to meet you? Is it a time to accept silver or to accept garments or olive groves or vineyards or sheep or cattle or male or female servants?
27 Now Naʹa·man’s leprosy will stick to you and your descendants forever.” Immediately he went out from before him a leper, white as snow.
7 E·liʹsha now said, “Listen to the word of Jehovah. This is what Jehovah says: ‘Tomorrow about this time at the gate of Sa·marʹi·a, a seah measure of fine flour will be worth a shekel, and two seah measures of barley will be worth a shekel.’”
2 At that the adjutant whom the king relied on said to the man of the true God: “Even if Jehovah should open floodgates in the heavens, could this possibly take place?” To that he said: “You will see it with your own eyes, but you will not eat from it.”
3 There were four lepers at the entrance of the city gate, and they said to one another: “Why are we sitting here until we die?
4 If we say, ‘Let us go into the city,’ while the famine is in the city, we would die there. And if we sit here, we will die anyway. So now let us go over to the camp of the Syrians. If they spare our lives, we will live, but if they put us to death, then we will die.”
5 They then got up in the evening darkness and entered the camp of the Syrians. When they reached the outskirts of the Syrian camp, there was nobody there.
6 For Jehovah had caused the Syrian camp to hear the sound of war chariots and horses, the sound of a huge army. So they said to one another: “Look! The king of Israel has hired the kings of the Hitʹtites and the kings of Egypt to come against us!”
7 They immediately got up and fled in the evening darkness, leaving their tents, horses, donkeys, and the whole camp just as it was, and they fled for their lives.
8 When these lepers reached the outskirts of the camp, they entered into one of the tents and began to eat and drink. They carried away from there silver, gold, and garments and went and hid them. Then they returned and entered another tent and carried things away from there and went and hid them.
9 Finally they said to one another: “What we are doing is not right. This day is a day of good news! If we hesitate and wait until dawn, we will deserve to be punished. Let us now go and report this at the king’s house.”
10 So they went and called out to the gatekeepers of the city and reported to them: “We went into the camp of the Syrians, but nobody was there—we did not hear anyone at all. There were only the horses and donkeys tied and the tents left just as they were.”
11 At once the gatekeepers called out, and it was reported inside the king’s house.
12 Immediately the king got up by night and said to his servants: “Please let me tell you what the Syrians have done to us. They know that we are hungry, so they left the camp to hide in the field, saying, ‘They will come out of the city, and we will catch them alive and enter into the city.’”
13 Then one of his servants said: “Please, let some men take five of the remaining horses that are in the city. Look! They will end up the same as all the crowd of Israel that remain here. Look! They will end up the same as all the crowd of Israel that perished. Let us then send them out and see.”
14 So they took two chariots with horses, and the king sent them out to the camp of the Syrians, saying: “Go and see.”
15 They followed them as far as the Jordan, and the entire way was covered with garments and utensils that the Syrians had thrown away as they fled in panic. The messengers returned and reported it to the king.
16 The people then went out and plundered the camp of the Syrians, so that a seah measure of fine flour came to be worth a shekel, and two seah measures of barley came to be worth a shekel, according to the word of Jehovah.
17 The king had appointed the adjutant whom he relied on to be in charge of the gate, but the people trampled him to death at the gate, just as the man of the true God had told the king when he came down to him.
18 It happened just as the man of the true God had said to the king: “Two seah measures of barley will be worth a shekel, and a seah measure of fine flour will be worth a shekel tomorrow at this time at the gate of Sa·marʹi·a.”
19 But the adjutant had said to the man of the true God: “Even if Jehovah should open floodgates in the heavens, could such a thing take place?” To this E·liʹsha had said: “You will see it with your own eyes, but you will not eat from it.”
20 That is exactly what happened to him, because the people trampled him to death at the gate.
9 E·liʹsha the prophet then called one of the sons of the prophets and said to him: “Wrap your garments around your waist, and quickly take this flask of oil with you and go to Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad.
2 When you arrive there, look for Jeʹhu the son of Je·hoshʹa·phat the son of Nimʹshi; go in and have him get up from among his brothers and take him into the innermost room.
3 Then take the flask of oil and pour it out on his head and say, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “I anoint you as king over Israel.”’ Then open the door and flee without delay.”
4 So the prophet’s attendant got on his way to Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad.
5 When he arrived, the army chiefs were seated there. He said: “I have a message for you, O chief.” Jeʹhu asked: “For which one of us?” He said: “For you, O chief.”
6 So Jeʹhu got up and went into the house; the attendant poured the oil out on his head and said to him, “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: ‘I anoint you as king over Jehovah’s people, over Israel.
7 You must strike down the house of Aʹhab your lord, and I will avenge the blood of my servants the prophets and of all the servants of Jehovah who died at the hands of Jezʹe·bel.
8 And the whole house of Aʹhab will perish; and I will annihilate from Aʹhab every male, including the helpless and weak in Israel.
9 And I will make the house of Aʹhab like the house of Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat and like the house of Baʹa·sha the son of A·hiʹjah.
10 As for Jezʹe·bel, the dogs will eat her up in the plot of land at Jezʹre·el, and no one will bury her.’” With that he opened the door and fled.
11 When Jeʹhu went back to the servants of his lord, they asked him: “Is everything all right? Why did this crazy man come to you?” He answered them: “You know that sort of man and his sort of talk.”
12 But they said: “That is not true! Tell us, please.” Then he said: “This is what he said to me, and then he added, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “I anoint you as king over Israel.”’”
13 At this each of them quickly took his garment and put it under him on the bare steps, and they blew the horn and said: “Jeʹhu has become king!”
14 Then Jeʹhu the son of Je·hoshʹa·phat the son of Nimʹshi conspired against Je·hoʹram. Je·hoʹram had been on guard at Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad, he with all Israel, because of King Hazʹa·el of Syria.
15 King Je·hoʹram later returned to Jezʹre·el to recover from the wounds that the Syrians inflicted on him when he fought King Hazʹa·el of Syria. Jeʹhu now said: “If you agree, do not let anyone escape from the city to go and report this in Jezʹre·el.”
16 Then Jeʹhu mounted his chariot and went to Jezʹre·el, for Je·hoʹram was lying there wounded, and King A·ha·ziʹah of Judah had gone down to see Je·hoʹram.
17 As the watchman was standing on the tower in Jezʹre·el, he saw the throng of Jeʹhu’s men approaching. At once he said: “I see a throng of men.” Je·hoʹram said: “Take a cavalryman and send him to meet them, and let him say, ‘Are you coming in peace?’”
18 So a horseman went to meet him and said: “This is what the king says, ‘Are you coming in peace?’” But Jeʹhu said: “What do you have to do with ‘peace’? Fall in behind me!” The watchman then reported: “The messenger reached them, but he has not returned.”
19 So he sent out a second horseman, who said when he came to them: “This is what the king says, ‘Are you coming in peace?’” But Jeʹhu said: “What do you have to do with ‘peace’? Fall in behind me!”
20 The watchman then reported: “He reached them, but he has not returned, and the driving is like the driving of Jeʹhu the grandson of Nimʹshi, for he drives like a madman.”
21 Je·hoʹram said: “Hitch up!” So his war chariot was hitched up and King Je·hoʹram of Israel and King A·ha·ziʹah of Judah each went out in his own war chariot to meet Jeʹhu. They encountered him in the plot of land of Naʹboth the Jezʹre·el·ite.
22 As soon as Je·hoʹram saw Jeʹhu, he said: “Are you coming in peace, Jeʹhu?” But he said: “What peace could there be as long as there is the prostitution of Jezʹe·bel your mother and her many sorceries?”
23 At once Je·hoʹram turned his chariot to flee, and he said to A·ha·ziʹah: “We have been tricked, A·ha·ziʹah!”
24 Jeʹhu took his bow in hand and shot Je·hoʹram between the shoulders, and the arrow came out at his heart, and he collapsed in his war chariot.
25 He then said to Bidʹkar his adjutant: “Pick him up and throw him into the field of Naʹboth the Jezʹre·el·ite. Remember, you and I were riding together behind Aʹhab his father when Jehovah himself made this pronouncement against him:
26 ‘“As surely as I saw the blood of Naʹboth and the blood of his sons yesterday,” declares Jehovah, “I will repay you in this very plot of land,” declares Jehovah.’ So now pick him up and throw him into the plot of land, according to the word of Jehovah.”
27 When King A·ha·ziʹah of Judah saw what was happening, he fled by way of the garden house. (Later Jeʹhu pursued him and said: “Strike him down also!” So they struck him down in the chariot on his way up to Gur, which is by Ibʹle·am. But he continued his flight to Me·gidʹdo and died there.
28 Then his servants carried him in a chariot to Jerusalem, and they buried him in his grave with his forefathers in the City of David.
29 It was in the 11th year of Je·hoʹram the son of Aʹhab that A·ha·ziʹah had become king over Judah.)
30 When Jeʹhu came to Jezʹre·el, Jezʹe·bel heard of it. So she painted her eyes with black paint and adorned her head and looked down through the window.
31 As Jeʹhu came in through the gate, she said: “Did it go well with Zimʹri, the killer of his lord?”
32 Looking up to the window, he said: “Who is on my side? Who?” Immediately two or three court officials looked down at him.
33 He said: “Throw her down!” So they threw her down, and some of her blood splattered on the wall and on the horses, and he trampled her.
34 After that he went in and ate and drank. He then said: “Please, take care of this accursed woman and bury her. After all, she is the daughter of a king.”
35 But when they went to bury her, they did not find anything but her skull and her feet and the palms of her hands.
36 When they returned and told him, he said: “This fulfills the word of Jehovah that he spoke through his servant E·liʹjah the Tishʹbite, saying, ‘In the plot of land of Jezʹre·el, the dogs will eat the flesh of Jezʹe·bel.
37 And the dead body of Jezʹe·bel will become as manure on the surface of the field in the plot of land of Jezʹre·el, so that they may not say: “This is Jezʹe·bel.”’”
11 Now when Ath·a·liʹah, A·ha·ziʹah’s mother, saw that her son had died, she rose up and destroyed the entire royal line.
2 However, Je·hoshʹe·ba the daughter of King Je·hoʹram, A·ha·ziʹah’s sister, took Je·hoʹash the son of A·ha·ziʹah and stole him away from among the sons of the king who were to be put to death, keeping him and his nurse in an inner bedroom. They managed to keep him concealed from Ath·a·liʹah, so he was not put to death.
3 He remained with her for six years, hidden at the house of Jehovah, while Ath·a·liʹah was ruling over the land.
4 In the seventh year, Je·hoiʹa·da sent for the chiefs of hundreds of the Caʹri·an bodyguard and of the palace guards and had them come to him at the house of Jehovah. He made a pact with them and had them swear to it at the house of Jehovah, and then he showed them the son of the king.
5 He ordered them: “This is what you are to do: One third of you will be on duty on the Sabbath and will keep strict watch over the king’s house,
6 another third will be at the Gate of the Foundation, and another third will be at the gate behind the palace guards. You will take turns watching over the house.
7 Your two divisions that are supposed to be off duty on the Sabbath must keep strict watch over the house of Jehovah to protect the king.
8 You must surround the king on every side, each with his weapons in hand. Anyone entering within the ranks will be put to death. Stay with the king wherever he goes.”
9 The chiefs of hundreds did exactly what Je·hoiʹa·da the priest had commanded. So each one took his men who were on duty on the Sabbath, together with those who were off duty on the Sabbath, and they came in to Je·hoiʹa·da the priest.
10 The priest then gave the chiefs of hundreds the spears and the circular shields that had belonged to King David, which were in the house of Jehovah.
11 And the palace guards took their positions, each with his weapons in hand, from the right side of the house to the left side of the house, by the altar and by the house, all around the king.
12 Then Je·hoiʹa·da brought the king’s son out and put on him the crown and the Testimony, and they made him king and anointed him. They began to clap their hands and say: “Long live the king!”
13 When Ath·a·liʹah heard the sound of the people running, she immediately came to the people at the house of Jehovah.
14 Then she saw the king standing there by the pillar according to the custom. The chiefs and the trumpeters were with the king, and all the people of the land were rejoicing and blowing the trumpets. At this Ath·a·liʹah ripped her garments apart and cried out: “Conspiracy! Conspiracy!”
15 But Je·hoiʹa·da the priest commanded the chiefs of hundreds, those appointed over the army, and said to them: “Take her out from among the ranks, and if anyone follows her, put him to death with the sword!” For the priest had said: “Do not put her to death in the house of Jehovah.”
16 So they seized her, and when she reached the place where the horses enter the king’s house, she was put to death there.
17 Then Je·hoiʹa·da made a covenant between Jehovah and the king and the people, that they would continue as the people of Jehovah, and he also made a covenant between the king and the people.
18 After that all the people of the land came to the house of Baʹal and tore down his altars, completely smashed his images, and killed Matʹtan the priest of Baʹal in front of the altars. Then the priest appointed overseers over the house of Jehovah.
19 Further, he took the chiefs of hundreds, the Caʹri·an bodyguard, the palace guards, and all the people of the land to escort the king down from the house of Jehovah, and they came to the king’s house by the way of the gate of the palace guard. He then sat on the throne of the kings.
20 So all the people of the land rejoiced and the city was quiet, for they had put Ath·a·liʹah to death with the sword at the king’s house.
21 Je·hoʹash was seven years old when he became king.
17 In the 12th year of King Aʹhaz of Judah, Ho·sheʹa the son of Eʹlah became king over Israel in Sa·marʹi·a; he ruled for nine years.
2 He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, only not to the extent of the kings of Israel prior to him.
3 King Shal·man·eʹser of As·syrʹi·a came up against him, and Ho·sheʹa became his servant and began to pay tribute to him.
4 However, the king of As·syrʹi·a learned that Ho·sheʹa was involved in a conspiracy, for he had sent messengers to King So of Egypt and did not bring the tribute up to the king of As·syrʹi·a as in former years. Therefore, the king of As·syrʹi·a kept him confined and bound in prison.
5 The king of As·syrʹi·a invaded the entire land, and he came to Sa·marʹi·a and laid siege to it for three years.
6 In the ninth year of Ho·sheʹa, the king of As·syrʹi·a captured Sa·marʹi·a. He then led the people of Israel into exile in As·syrʹi·a and made them dwell in Haʹlah and in Haʹbor at the river Goʹzan and in the cities of the Medes.
7 This happened because the people of Israel had sinned against Jehovah their God, who brought them up out of the land of Egypt from under the control of Pharʹaoh king of Egypt. They worshipped other gods,
8 they followed the customs of the nations that Jehovah had driven out from before the Israelites, and they followed the customs that the kings of Israel had established.
9 The Israelites were pursuing the things that were not right according to Jehovah their God. They kept building high places in all their cities, from watchtower to fortified city.
10 They kept setting up for themselves sacred pillars and sacred poles on every high hill and under every luxuriant tree;
11 and on all the high places they would make sacrificial smoke just as the nations did that Jehovah had driven into exile from before them. They kept doing wicked things to offend Jehovah.
12 They continued to serve disgusting idols, about which Jehovah had told them: “You must not do this!”
13 Jehovah kept warning Israel and Judah through all his prophets and every visionary, saying: “Turn back from your wicked ways! Keep my commandments and my statutes according to all the law that I commanded your forefathers and that I sent to you through my servants the prophets.”
14 But they did not listen, and they remained just as stubborn as their forefathers who had not shown faith in Jehovah their God.
15 They continued rejecting his regulations and his covenant that he had made with their forefathers and his reminders that he had given to warn them, and they kept following worthless idols and became worthless themselves, imitating the nations all around them that Jehovah had commanded them not to imitate.
16 They kept leaving all the commandments of Jehovah their God, and they made metal statues of two calves and a sacred pole, and they bowed down to all the army of the heavens and served Baʹal.
17 They also made their sons and their daughters pass through the fire, they practiced divination and looked for omens, and they kept devoting themselves to do what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah, to offend him.
18 So Jehovah was very angry with Israel, so that he removed them from his sight. He did not let any remain but the tribe of Judah alone.
19 Even Judah did not keep the commandments of Jehovah their God; they also walked in the customs that Israel followed.
20 Jehovah rejected all the descendants of Israel and humiliated them and gave them into the hand of plunderers, until he had cast them away from before him.
21 He ripped Israel away from the house of David, and they made Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat king. But Jer·o·boʹam caused Israel to stray from following Jehovah, and he caused them to commit a great sin.
22 And the people of Israel kept walking in all the sins that Jer·o·boʹam had committed. They did not depart from them
23 until Jehovah removed Israel from his sight, just as he had declared through all his servants the prophets. So Israel was taken into exile from its land to As·syrʹi·a, where they remain to this day.
24 The king of As·syrʹi·a then brought people from Babylon, Cuʹthah, Avʹva, Haʹmath, and Seph·ar·vaʹim and settled them in the cities of Sa·marʹi·a in place of the Israelites; they took possession of Sa·marʹi·a and lived in its cities.
25 When they first began dwelling there, they did not fear Jehovah. So Jehovah sent lions among them, and they killed some of the people.
26 It was reported to the king of As·syrʹi·a: “The nations that you have taken into exile and resettled in the cities of Sa·marʹi·a do not know the religion of the God of the land. So he keeps sending lions among them, which are putting them to death, because none of them know the religion of the God of the land.”
27 At that the king of As·syrʹi·a commanded: “Have one of the priests whom you took into exile from there return to live there and to teach them the religion of the God of the land.”
28 So one of the priests whom they had taken into exile from Sa·marʹi·a came back to live in Bethʹel, and he began to teach them how they should fear Jehovah.
29 However, each different nation made their own god, which they placed in the houses of worship on the high places that the Sa·marʹi·tans had made; each different nation did so in their cities where they were living.
30 So the men of Babylon made Sucʹcoth-beʹnoth, the men of Cuth made Nerʹgal, the men of Haʹmath made A·shiʹma,
31 and the Avʹvites made Nibʹhaz and Tarʹtak. The Seʹphar·vites would burn their sons in the fire to A·dramʹme·lech and A·namʹme·lech, the gods of Seph·ar·vaʹim.
32 Although they feared Jehovah, they appointed priests for the high places from the people in general, and these officiated for them at the houses of worship on the high places.
33 Thus, they feared Jehovah, but they worshipped their own gods according to the religion of the nations from which they had been deported.
34 To this day they follow their former religions. None of them worship Jehovah, and none follow his statutes, his judgments, the Law, and the commandment that Jehovah gave the sons of Jacob, whose name he changed to Israel.
35 When Jehovah made a covenant with them, he commanded them: “You must not fear other gods, and you must not bow down to them or serve them or sacrifice to them.
36 But Jehovah, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt with great power and an outstretched arm, is the One you should fear, and to him you should bow down, and to him you should sacrifice.
37 And the regulations, the judgments, the Law, and the commandment that he wrote for you, you should always follow carefully, and you must not fear other gods.
38 And you must not forget the covenant that I made with you, and you must not fear other gods.
39 But it is Jehovah your God whom you should fear, as he is the one who will rescue you out of the hand of all your enemies.”
40 But they did not obey, and they followed their former religion.
41 So these nations came to fear Jehovah, but they were also serving their own graven images. Both their sons and their grandsons have done just as their forefathers did, down to this day.
19 As soon as King Hez·e·kiʹah heard this, he ripped his garments apart and covered himself with sackcloth and went into the house of Jehovah.
2 Then he sent E·liʹa·kim, who was in charge of the household, Shebʹnah the secretary, and the elders of the priests, covered with sackcloth, to the prophet Isaiah, the son of Aʹmoz.
3 They said to him: “This is what Hez·e·kiʹah says, ‘This day is a day of distress, of rebuke, and of disgrace; for the children are ready to be born, but there is no strength to give birth.
4 Perhaps Jehovah your God will hear all the words of the Rabʹsha·keh, whom the king of As·syrʹi·a his lord sent to taunt the living God, and he will call him to account for the words that Jehovah your God has heard. So offer up a prayer in behalf of the remnant who have survived.’”
5 So the servants of King Hez·e·kiʹah went in to Isaiah,
6 and Isaiah said to them: “This is what you should say to your lord, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Do not be afraid because of the words that you heard, the words with which the attendants of the king of As·syrʹi·a blasphemed me.
7 Here I am putting a thought in his mind, and he will hear a report and return to his own land; and I will make him fall by the sword in his own land.”’”
8 After the Rabʹsha·keh heard that the king of As·syrʹi·a had pulled away from Laʹchish, he returned to him and found him fighting against Libʹnah.
9 Now the king heard it said about King Tir·haʹkah of E·thi·oʹpi·a: “Here he has come out to fight against you.” So he sent messengers again to Hez·e·kiʹah, saying:
10 “This is what you should say to King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah, ‘Do not let your God in whom you trust deceive you by saying: “Jerusalem will not be given into the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a.”
11 Look! You have heard what the kings of As·syrʹi·a did to all the lands by devoting them to destruction. Will you alone be rescued?
12 Did the gods of the nations that my forefathers destroyed rescue them? Where are Goʹzan, Haʹran, Reʹzeph, and the people of Eʹden who were in Tel-asʹsar?
13 Where is the king of Haʹmath, the king of Arʹpad, and the king of the cities of Seph·ar·vaʹim, and of Heʹna, and of Ivʹvah?’”
14 Hez·e·kiʹah took the letters out of the hand of the messengers and read them. Hez·e·kiʹah then went up to the house of Jehovah and spread them out before Jehovah.
15 And Hez·e·kiʹah began to pray before Jehovah and say: “O Jehovah the God of Israel, sitting enthroned above the cherubs, you alone are the true God of all the kingdoms of the earth. You made the heavens and the earth.
16 Incline your ear, O Jehovah, and hear! Open your eyes, O Jehovah, and see! Hear the words that Sen·nachʹer·ib has sent to taunt the living God.
17 It is a fact, O Jehovah, that the kings of As·syrʹi·a have devastated the nations and their lands.
18 And they have thrown their gods into the fire, because they were not gods but the work of human hands, wood and stone. That is why they could destroy them.
19 But now, O Jehovah our God, please save us out of his hand, so that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that you alone are God, O Jehovah.”
20 Isaiah son of Aʹmoz then sent this message to Hez·e·kiʹah: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘I have heard your prayer to me concerning King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a.
21 This is the word that Jehovah has spoken against him: “The virgin daughter of Zion despises you, she scoffs at you. The daughter of Jerusalem shakes her head at you.
22 Whom have you taunted and blasphemed? Against whom have you raised your voice And lifted your arrogant eyes? It is against the Holy One of Israel!
23 Through your messengers you have taunted Jehovah and said, ‘With the multitude of my war chariots I will ascend the heights of mountains, The remotest parts of Lebʹa·non. I will cut down its lofty cedars, its choice juniper trees. I will enter its farthest retreats, its densest forests.
24 I will dig wells and drink foreign waters; I will dry up all the streams of Egypt with the soles of my feet.’
25 Have you not heard? From long ago it was determined. From days gone by I have prepared it. Now I will bring it about. You will turn fortified cities into desolate piles of ruins.
26 Their inhabitants will be helpless; They will be terrified and put to shame. They will become as vegetation of the field and green grass, As grass of the roofs that is scorched by the east wind.
27 But I well know when you sit, when you go out, when you come in, And when you are enraged against me,
28 Because your rage against me and your roaring have reached my ears. So I will put my hook in your nose and my bridle between your lips, And I will lead you back the way you came.”
29 “‘And this will be the sign for you: This year you will eat what grows on its own; and in the second year you will eat grain that sprouts from that; but in the third year you will sow seed and reap, and you will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage.
30 Those of the house of Judah who escape, those who are left, will take root downward and produce fruit upward.
31 For a remnant will go out of Jerusalem and survivors from Mount Zion. The zeal of Jehovah of armies will do this.
32 “‘Therefore this is what Jehovah says about the king of As·syrʹi·a: “He will not come into this city Or shoot an arrow there Or confront it with a shield Or cast up a siege rampart against it.
33 By the way he came he will return; He will not come into this city,” declares Jehovah.
34 “I will defend this city and save it for my own sake And for the sake of my servant David.”’”
35 On that very night the angel of Jehovah went out and struck down 185,000 men in the camp of the As·syrʹi·ans. When people rose up early in the morning, they saw all the dead bodies.
36 So King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a departed and returned to Ninʹe·veh and stayed there.
37 And as he was bowing down at the house of his god Nisʹroch, his own sons A·dramʹme·lech and Shar·eʹzer struck him down with the sword and then escaped to the land of Arʹa·rat. And his son Eʹsar-hadʹdon became king in his place.
1 Adam, Seth, Eʹnosh,
2 Keʹnan, Ma·halʹa·lel, Jaʹred,
3 Eʹnoch, Me·thuʹse·lah, Laʹmech,
4 Noah, Shem, Ham, and Jaʹpheth.
5 The sons of Jaʹpheth were Goʹmer, Maʹgog, Maʹda·i, Jaʹvan, Tuʹbal, Meʹshech, and Tiʹras.
6 The sons of Goʹmer were Ashʹke·naz, Riʹphath, and To·garʹmah.
7 The sons of Jaʹvan were E·liʹshah, Tarʹshish, Kitʹtim, and Roʹda·nim.
8 The sons of Ham were Cush, Mizʹra·im, Put, and Caʹnaan.
9 The sons of Cush were Seʹba, Havʹi·lah, Sabʹtah, Raʹa·mah, and Sabʹte·ca. The sons of Raʹa·mah were Sheʹba and Deʹdan.
10 Cush became father to Nimʹrod. He was the first to become a mighty one on the earth.
11 Mizʹra·im became father to Luʹdim, Anʹa·mim, Le·haʹbim, Naph·tuʹhim,
12 Path·ruʹsim, Cas·luʹhim (from whom the Phi·lisʹtines came), and Caphʹto·rim.
13 Caʹnaan became father to Siʹdon, his firstborn, and Heth,
14 as well as the Jebʹu·site, the Amʹor·ite, the Girʹga·shite,
15 the Hiʹvite, the Arkʹite, the Siʹnite,
16 the Arʹvad·ite, the Zemʹa·rite, and the Haʹmath·ite.
17 The sons of Shem were Eʹlam, Asʹshur, Ar·pachʹshad, Lud, and Aʹram, and Uz, Hul, Geʹther, and Mash.
18 Ar·pachʹshad became father to Sheʹlah, and Sheʹlah became father to Eʹber.
19 Two sons were born to Eʹber. The name of the one was Peʹleg, because in his lifetime the earth was divided. The name of his brother was Jokʹtan.
20 Jokʹtan became father to Al·moʹdad, Sheʹleph, Ha·zar·maʹveth, Jeʹrah,
21 Ha·doʹram, Uʹzal, Dikʹlah,
22 Oʹbal, A·bimʹa·el, Sheʹba,
23 Oʹphir, Havʹi·lah, and Joʹbab; all of these were the sons of Jokʹtan.
24 Shem, Ar·pachʹshad, Sheʹlah,
25 Eʹber, Peʹleg, Reʹu,
26 Seʹrug, Naʹhor, Teʹrah,
27 Aʹbram, that is, Abraham.
28 The sons of Abraham were Isaac and Ishʹma·el.
29 These are their family origins: Ishʹma·el’s firstborn Ne·baʹioth, then Keʹdar, Adʹbe·el, Mibʹsam,
30 Mishʹma, Duʹmah, Masʹsa, Haʹdad, Teʹma,
31 Jeʹtur, Naʹphish, and Kedʹe·mah. These were the sons of Ishʹma·el.
32 The sons that Ke·tuʹrah, Abraham’s concubine, gave birth to were Zimʹran, Jokʹshan, Meʹdan, Midʹi·an, Ishʹbak, and Shuʹah. The sons of Jokʹshan were Sheʹba and Deʹdan.
33 The sons of Midʹi·an were Eʹphah, Eʹpher, Haʹnoch, A·biʹda, and El·daʹah. All of these were the sons of Ke·tuʹrah.
34 Abraham became father to Isaac. The sons of Isaac were Eʹsau and Israel.
35 The sons of Eʹsau were Elʹi·phaz, Reuʹel, Jeʹush, Jaʹlam, and Korʹah.
36 The sons of Elʹi·phaz were Teʹman, Oʹmar, Zeʹpho, Gaʹtam, Keʹnaz, Timʹna, and Amʹa·lek.
37 The sons of Reuʹel were Naʹhath, Zeʹrah, Shamʹmah, and Mizʹzah.
38 The sons of Seʹir were Loʹtan, Shoʹbal, Zibʹe·on, Aʹnah, Diʹshon, Eʹzer, and Diʹshan.
39 The sons of Loʹtan were Hoʹri and Hoʹmam. Loʹtan’s sister was Timʹna.
40 The sons of Shoʹbal were Alʹvan, Manʹa·hath, Eʹbal, Sheʹpho, and Oʹnam. The sons of Zibʹe·on were Aʹiah and Aʹnah.
41 The son of Aʹnah was Diʹshon. The sons of Diʹshon were Hemʹdan, Eshʹban, Ithʹran, and Cheʹran.
42 The sons of Eʹzer were Bilʹhan, Zaʹa·van, and Aʹkan. The sons of Diʹshan were Uz and Aʹran.
43 These are the kings who reigned in the land of Eʹdom before any king reigned over the Israelites: Beʹla the son of Beʹor; the name of his city was Dinʹha·bah.
44 When Beʹla died, Joʹbab the son of Zeʹrah from Bozʹrah began to reign in his place.
45 When Joʹbab died, Huʹsham from the land of the Teʹman·ites began to reign in his place.
46 When Huʹsham died, Haʹdad the son of Beʹdad, who defeated Midʹi·an in the territory of Moʹab, began to reign in his place. The name of his city was Aʹvith.
47 When Haʹdad died, Samʹlah from Mas·reʹkah began to reign in his place.
48 When Samʹlah died, Shaʹul from Re·hoʹboth by the River began to reign in his place.
49 When Shaʹul died, Baʹal-haʹnan the son of Achʹbor began to reign in his place.
50 When Baʹal-haʹnan died, Haʹdad began to reign in his place. The name of his city was Paʹu, and the name of his wife was Me·hetʹa·bel the daughter of Maʹtred, the daughter of Meʹza·hab.
51 Then Haʹdad died. The sheikhs of Eʹdom were Sheikh Timʹna, Sheikh Alʹvah, Sheikh Jeʹtheth,
52 Sheikh O·hol·i·baʹmah, Sheikh Eʹlah, Sheikh Piʹnon,
53 Sheikh Keʹnaz, Sheikh Teʹman, Sheikh Mibʹzar,
54 Sheikh Magʹdi·el, Sheikh Iʹram. These were the sheikhs of Eʹdom.
5 These are the sons of Reuʹben, Israel’s firstborn. He was the firstborn, but because he defiled the bed of his father, his right as firstborn was given to the sons of Joseph the son of Israel, so he was not enrolled genealogically for the right of the firstborn.
2 Though Judah was superior to his brothers and from him came the one to be the leader, the right as firstborn belonged to Joseph.
3 The sons of Reuʹben the firstborn of Israel were Haʹnoch, Palʹlu, Hezʹron, and Carʹmi.
4 The sons of Joel were She·maiʹah his son, Gog his son, Shimʹe·i his son,
5 Miʹcah his son, Re·aʹiah his son, Baʹal his son,
6 and Be·erʹah his son, whom King Tilʹgath-pil·neʹser of As·syrʹi·a took into exile; he was a chieftain of the Reuʹben·ites.
7 His brothers by their families in the genealogical enrollment by their descendants were, as the head, Je·iʹel, Zech·a·riʹah,
8 and Beʹla son of Aʹzaz son of Sheʹma son of Joel, who lived in A·roʹer and as far as Neʹbo and Baʹal-meʹon.
9 To the east he settled as far as the beginning of the wilderness at the Eu·phraʹtes River, for their livestock had become numerous in the land of Gilʹe·ad.
10 In the days of Saul, they waged war against the Hagʹrites, who were defeated before them, so they dwelled in their tents throughout all the territory east of Gilʹe·ad.
11 Now the descendants of Gad lived next to them in the land of Baʹshan as far as Salʹe·cah.
12 Joel was the head, Shaʹpham the second, and Jaʹnai and Shaʹphat in Baʹshan.
13 And their brothers belonging to their paternal houses were Miʹcha·el, Me·shulʹlam, Sheʹba, Joʹrai, Jaʹcan, Ziʹa, and Eʹber, seven in all.
14 These were the sons of Abʹi·ha·il son of Huʹri son of Ja·roʹah son of Gilʹe·ad son of Miʹcha·el son of Je·shishʹai son of Jahʹdo son of Buz.
15 Aʹhi son of Abʹdi·el son of Guʹni was head of their paternal house.
16 They lived in Gilʹe·ad, in Baʹshan and its dependent towns, and in all the pastures of Sharʹon as far as they extended.
17 They were all enrolled genealogically in the days of King Joʹtham of Judah and in the days of King Jer·o·boʹam of Israel.
18 The Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh had 44,760 mighty warriors in their army who carried shields and swords and were armed with bows, and they were trained in war.
19 They waged war against the Hagʹrites, Jeʹtur, Naʹphish, and Noʹdab.
20 And they were helped in fighting them, so that the Hagʹrites and all who were with them were given into their hand, for they called to God for help in the war, and he responded to their entreaty because they trusted in him.
21 They captured their livestock—50,000 camels, 250,000 sheep, and 2,000 donkeys—as well as 100,000 people.
22 Many had fallen slain, because the war was waged by the true God. And they lived in their place until the time of the exile.
23 The descendants of the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh lived in the land from Baʹshan to Baʹal-herʹmon and Seʹnir and Mount Herʹmon. They were numerous.
24 These were the heads of their paternal houses: Eʹpher, Ishʹi, Eʹli·el, Azʹri·el, Jeremiah, Hod·a·viʹah, and Jahʹdi·el; they were mighty warriors, men of fame, and heads of their paternal houses.
25 But they acted unfaithfully toward the God of their forefathers and prostituted themselves to the gods of the peoples of the land, whom God had annihilated from before them.
26 So the God of Israel stirred up the spirit of King Pul of As·syrʹi·a (that is, King Tilʹgath-pil·neʹser of As·syrʹi·a) so that he took into exile those of the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh and brought them to Haʹlah, Haʹbor, Haʹra, and the river Goʹzan, where they are until this day.
7 Now the sons of Isʹsa·char were Toʹla, Puʹah, Jaʹshub, and Shimʹron—four.
2 And the sons of Toʹla were Uzʹzi, Re·phaʹiah, Jeʹri·el, Jahʹmai, Ibʹsam, and She·muʹel, the heads of their paternal houses. Descended from Toʹla were mighty warriors, whose number in the days of David was 22,600.
3 And the descendants of Uzʹzi were Iz·ra·hiʹah and the sons of Iz·ra·hiʹah: Miʹcha·el, O·ba·diʹah, Joel, and Is·shiʹah—all five of them were chiefs.
4 And with them by their descendants, according to their paternal houses, there were 36,000 soldiers in their army available for war, for they had many wives and sons.
5 And their brothers of all the families of Isʹsa·char were mighty warriors, 87,000 as listed in the genealogical enrollment.
6 The sons of Benjamin were Beʹla, Beʹcher, and Je·diʹa·el—three.
7 And the sons of Beʹla were Ezʹbon, Uzʹzi, Uzʹzi·el, Jerʹi·moth, and Iʹri—five—heads of their paternal houses, mighty warriors, and 22,034 were in their genealogical enrollment.
8 And the sons of Beʹcher were Ze·miʹrah, Joʹash, E·li·eʹzer, Eli·o·eʹnai, Omʹri, Jerʹe·moth, A·biʹjah, Anʹa·thoth, and Alʹe·meth—all of these were the sons of Beʹcher.
9 Their genealogical enrollment by their descendants as respects the heads of their paternal houses was 20,200 mighty warriors.
10 And the sons of Je·diʹa·el were Bilʹhan and the sons of Bilʹhan: Jeʹush, Benjamin, Eʹhud, Che·naʹa·nah, Zeʹthan, Tarʹshish, and A·hishʹa·har.
11 All of these were the sons of Je·diʹa·el, according to the heads of their forefathers, 17,200 mighty warriors ready to go out to the army for war.
12 The Shupʹpim and the Hupʹpim were the sons of Ir; the Huʹshim were the sons of Aʹher.
13 The sons of Naphʹta·li were Jahʹzi·el, Guʹni, Jeʹzer, and Shalʹlum—descendants of Bilʹhah.
14 The sons of Ma·nasʹseh: Asʹri·el, whom his Syrian concubine bore. (She bore Maʹchir the father of Gilʹe·ad.
15 Maʹchir took a wife for Hupʹpim and for Shupʹpim, and the name of his sister was Maʹa·cah.) The name of the second was Ze·loʹphe·had, but Ze·loʹphe·had had daughters.
16 Maʹa·cah, Maʹchir’s wife, bore a son and named him Peʹresh; and the name of his brother was Sheʹresh; and his sons were Uʹlam and Reʹkem.
17 And the son of Uʹlam was Beʹdan. These were the sons of Gilʹe·ad son of Maʹchir son of Ma·nasʹseh.
18 And his sister was Ham·moʹle·cheth. She gave birth to Ishʹhod, Abi-eʹzer, and Mahʹlah.
19 And the sons of She·miʹda were A·hiʹan, Sheʹchem, Likʹhi, and A·niʹam.
20 The sons of Eʹphra·im were Shuʹthe·lah, Beʹred his son, Taʹhath his son, E·le·aʹdah his son, Taʹhath his son,
21 Zaʹbad his son, Shuʹthe·lah his son, Eʹzer, and Eʹle·ad. The men of Gath who were born in the land killed them because they went down to take their livestock.
22 Eʹphra·im their father carried on mourning for many days, and his brothers kept coming in to comfort him.
23 Afterward he had relations with his wife, and she became pregnant and gave birth to a son. But he named him Be·riʹah because it was with calamity that she was in his house.
24 And his daughter was Sheʹe·rah, who built Lower and Upper Beth-hoʹron and Uzʹzen-sheʹe·rah.
25 And there was Reʹphah his son, Reʹsheph, Teʹlah his son, Taʹhan his son,
26 Laʹdan his son, Am·miʹhud his son, E·lishʹa·ma his son,
27 Nun his son, and Joshua his son.
28 Their possession and their settlements were Bethʹel and its dependent towns, and to the east Naʹa·ran, and to the west Geʹzer and its dependent towns, and Sheʹchem and its dependent towns, as far as Ayʹyah and its dependent towns;
29 and next to the descendants of Ma·nasʹseh, Beth-sheʹan and its dependent towns, Taʹa·nach and its dependent towns, Me·gidʹdo and its dependent towns, and Dor and its dependent towns. In these the descendants of Joseph the son of Israel lived.
30 The sons of Ashʹer were Imʹnah, Ishʹvah, Ishʹvi, and Be·riʹah, and their sister was Seʹrah.
31 The sons of Be·riʹah were Heʹber and Malʹchi·el, who was the father of Birʹza·ith.
32 Heʹber became father to Japhʹlet, Shoʹmer, and Hoʹtham, and to Shuʹa their sister.
33 The sons of Japhʹlet were Paʹsach, Bimʹhal, and Ashʹvath. These were the sons of Japhʹlet.
34 The sons of Sheʹmer were Aʹhi, Rohʹgah, Je·hubʹbah, and Aʹram.
35 The sons of Heʹlem his brother were Zoʹphah, Imʹna, Sheʹlesh, and Aʹmal.
36 The sons of Zoʹphah were Suʹah, Harʹne·pher, Shuʹal, Beʹri, Imʹrah,
37 Beʹzer, Hod, Shamʹma, Shilʹshah, Ithʹran, and Be·eʹra.
38 The sons of Jeʹther were Je·phunʹneh, Pisʹpah, and Aʹra.
39 The sons of Ulʹla were Aʹrah, Hanʹni·el, and Ri·ziʹa.
40 All of these were the sons of Ashʹer, heads of their paternal houses, select, mighty warriors, heads of the chieftains; and their number listed in the genealogical enrollment was 26,000 men in the army available for war.
10 Now the Phi·lisʹtines were fighting against Israel. And the men of Israel fled from before the Phi·lisʹtines, and many fell slain on Mount Gil·boʹa.
2 The Phi·lisʹtines kept in close range of Saul and his sons, and the Phi·lisʹtines struck down Jonʹa·than, A·binʹa·dab, and Malʹchi-shuʹa, Saul’s sons.
3 The fighting grew fierce against Saul, and the archers found him, and he was wounded by the archers.
4 Then Saul said to his armor-bearer: “Draw your sword and run me through with it, so that these uncircumcised men may not come and deal ruthlessly with me.” But his armor-bearer was unwilling, because he was very much afraid. So Saul took the sword and fell on it.
5 When his armor-bearer saw that Saul was dead, he too fell on his own sword and died.
6 Thus Saul and his three sons died, and all those of his house died together.
7 When all the people of Israel in the valley saw that everyone had fled and that Saul and his sons had died, they began to abandon their cities and flee; the Phi·lisʹtines then came and occupied them.
8 The next day, when the Phi·lisʹtines came to strip the slain, they found Saul and his sons fallen on Mount Gil·boʹa.
9 So they stripped him and took off his head and his armor, and they sent word throughout the land of the Phi·lisʹtines to spread the news to their idols and the people.
10 Then they put his armor in the house of their god and fastened his skull to the house of Daʹgon.
11 When all those of Jaʹbesh in Gilʹe·ad heard about all that the Phi·lisʹtines had done to Saul,
12 all the warriors rose up and carried off the corpse of Saul and the corpses of his sons. They brought them to Jaʹbesh and buried their bones under the big tree in Jaʹbesh, and they fasted for seven days.
13 Thus Saul died for the unfaithfulness he had shown against Jehovah because he had not obeyed the word of Jehovah, also for consulting a spirit medium
14 instead of inquiring of Jehovah. So He put him to death and turned the kingship over to David the son of Jesʹse.
13 David consulted with the chiefs of the thousands and of the hundreds and with every leader.
2 Then David said to all the congregation of Israel: “If it seems good to you and it is acceptable to Jehovah our God, let us send word to our remaining brothers in all regions of Israel and also to the priests and the Levites in their cities with pastures to come and join us.
3 And let us bring back the Ark of our God.” For they had not cared for it in the days of Saul.
4 All the congregation agreed to do that, for it seemed right to all the people.
5 So David congregated all Israel, from the river of Egypt as far as Leʹbo-haʹmath, to bring the Ark of the true God from Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim.
6 David and all Israel went up to Baʹal·ah, to Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, which belongs to Judah, to bring up from there the Ark of the true God, Jehovah, who sits enthroned above the cherubs, where his name is called on.
7 However, they placed the Ark of the true God on a new wagon and brought it from the house of A·binʹa·dab, and Uzʹzah and A·hiʹo were leading the wagon.
8 David and all Israel were celebrating before the true God with all their might, accompanied by songs, harps, other stringed instruments, tambourines, cymbals, and trumpets.
9 But when they came to the threshing floor of Chiʹdon, Uzʹzah thrust his hand out and grabbed hold of the Ark, for the cattle nearly upset it.
10 At that Jehovah’s anger blazed against Uzʹzah, and He struck him down because he had thrust his hand out to the Ark, and he died there before God.
11 But David became angry because Jehovah’s wrath had broken through against Uzʹzah; and that place has been called Peʹrez-uzʹzah down to this day.
12 So David became fearful of the true God on that day and said: “How can I bring the Ark of the true God to me?”
13 David did not bring the Ark to where he was in the City of David, but he had it taken to the house of Oʹbed-eʹdom the Gitʹtite.
14 The Ark of the true God was with the household of Oʹbed-eʹdom, remaining at his house for three months, and Jehovah kept blessing the household of Oʹbed-eʹdom and all he had.
14 King Hiʹram of Tyre sent messengers to David, along with cedar timbers, stonemasons, and woodworkers to build a house for him.
2 And David knew that Jehovah had firmly established him as king over Israel, for his kingship was highly exalted for the sake of His people Israel.
3 David took more wives in Jerusalem, and David became father to more sons and daughters.
4 These are the names of the children born to him in Jerusalem: Sham·muʹa, Shoʹbab, Nathan, Solʹo·mon,
5 Ibʹhar, E·liʹshu·a, Elʹpe·let,
6 Noʹgah, Neʹpheg, Ja·phiʹa,
7 E·lishʹa·ma, Be·e·liʹa·da, and E·liphʹe·let.
8 When the Phi·lisʹtines heard that David had been anointed as king over all Israel, all the Phi·lisʹtines came up to search for David. When David heard about it, he went out against them.
9 Then the Phi·lisʹtines came in and kept making raids in the Valley of Rephʹa·im.
10 David inquired of God, saying: “Should I go up against the Phi·lisʹtines? Will you give them into my hand?” At this Jehovah said to him: “Go up, and I will surely give them into your hand.”
11 So David went up to Baʹal-pe·raʹzim, and he struck them down there. At that David said: “The true God has broken through my enemies by my hand, like a breach made by waters.” That is why they named that place Baʹal-pe·raʹzim.
12 The Phi·lisʹtines abandoned their gods there, and when David gave the order, these were burned in the fire.
13 Later the Phi·lisʹtines once again made a raid in the valley.
14 David again inquired of God, but the true God said to him: “Do not go directly up after them. Instead, go around behind them, and come against them in front of the baʹca bushes.
15 And when you hear the sound of marching in the tops of the baʹca bushes, launch your attack, for the true God will have gone out before you to strike down the army of the Phi·lisʹtines.”
16 So David did just as the true God commanded him, and they struck down the Phi·lisʹtine army from Gibʹe·on to Geʹzer.
17 And David’s fame spread into all the lands, and Jehovah put the dread of him upon all the nations.
17 As soon as David was settled in his own house, he said to Nathan the prophet: “Here I am living in a house of cedars while the ark of the covenant of Jehovah is under tent cloths.”
2 Nathan replied to David: “Do whatever is in your heart, for the true God is with you.”
3 On that very night, the word of God came to Nathan, saying:
4 “Go and say to my servant David, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “You are not the one who will build the house for me to dwell in.
5 For I have not dwelled in a house from the day I brought Israel out to this day, but I continued going from tent to tent and from one tabernacle to another.
6 During all the time that I went with all Israel, did I ever say one word to any of the judges of Israel whom I appointed to shepherd my people, saying, ‘Why did you not build a house of cedars for me?’”’
7 “Now say this to my servant David, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “I took you from the pastures, from following the flock, to become a leader over my people Israel.
8 And I will be with you wherever you go, and I will do away with all your enemies from before you; and I will make a name for you like the name of the great men of the earth.
9 I will appoint a place for my people Israel and settle them, and they will live there and not be disturbed anymore; and wicked men will not oppress them again as they did in the past,
10 from the day that I appointed judges over my people Israel. And I will subdue all your enemies. Moreover, I tell you, ‘Jehovah will build a house for you.’
11 “‘“When your days come to an end and you go to be with your forefathers, I will raise up your offspring after you, one of your sons, and I will firmly establish his kingship.
12 He is the one who will build a house for me, and I will firmly establish his throne forever.
13 I will become his father, and he will become my son. I will not remove my loyal love from him the way I removed it from the one who was prior to you.
14 I will cause him to stand in my house and in my kingship forever, and his throne will last forever.”’”
15 Nathan told David all these words and this entire vision.
16 At that King David came in and sat down before Jehovah and said: “Who am I, O Jehovah God? And what is my house that you have brought me this far?
17 As if this were not enough, O God, you also speak about the house of your servant down to a distant future time, and you have looked on me as if I were a man who should be further exalted, O Jehovah God.
18 What more can your servant David say to you about the honor given me when you know your servant so well?
19 O Jehovah, for the sake of your servant and in agreement with your heart you have done all these great things by revealing your greatness.
20 O Jehovah, there is no one like you, and there is no God except you; everything we have heard with our ears confirms this.
21 And what other nation on earth is like your people Israel? The true God went and redeemed them as his people. You made a name for yourself by your great and awe-inspiring deeds, driving out nations from before your people, whom you redeemed from Egypt.
22 You made your people Israel your own people for all time; and you, O Jehovah, became their God.
23 Now, O Jehovah, may the promise you have made concerning your servant and his house prove faithful for all time, and may you do just as you have promised.
24 May your name endure and be exalted forever, so that people may say, ‘Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, is God to Israel,’ and may the house of your servant David be firmly established before you.
25 For you, my God, have revealed to your servant your purpose to build him a house. That is why your servant has the confidence to offer this prayer to you.
26 And now, O Jehovah, you are the true God, and you have promised these good things concerning your servant.
27 So may it please you to bless the house of your servant, and may it continue forever before you, for you, O Jehovah, have blessed, and it is blessed forever.”
19 Later Naʹhash the king of the Amʹmon·ites died, and his son became king in his place.
2 At that David said: “I will show loyal love toward Haʹnun the son of Naʹhash, because his father showed loyal love toward me.” So David sent messengers to offer him comfort over the loss of his father. But when David’s servants came into the land of the Amʹmon·ites to comfort Haʹnun,
3 the princes of the Amʹmon·ites said to Haʹnun: “Do you think that David is honoring your father by sending comforters to you? Is it not to make a thorough search and to overthrow you and to spy out the land that his servants have come to you?”
4 So Haʹnun took the servants of David and shaved them and cut their garments in half at their buttocks and sent them away.
5 When David was told about the men, he at once sent others to meet them, because the men had been deeply humiliated; and the king told them: “Stay in Jerʹi·cho until your beards grow back, and then return.”
6 In time the Amʹmon·ites saw that they had become a stench to David, so Haʹnun and the Amʹmon·ites sent 1,000 silver talents to hire chariots and horsemen from Mes·o·po·taʹmi·a, Aʹram-maʹa·cah, and Zoʹbah.
7 Thus they hired 32,000 chariots, along with the king of Maʹa·cah and his people. Then they came and camped before Medʹe·ba. The Amʹmon·ites gathered together from their cities and came out for the battle.
8 When David heard about it, he sent Joʹab and the entire army, including his mightiest warriors.
9 And the Amʹmon·ites went out and drew up in battle formation at the entrance of the city while the kings who had come were by themselves in the open field.
10 When Joʹab saw that the battle charges were coming against him from the front and the rear, he chose some of the best troops in Israel and drew them up in battle formation to meet the Syrians.
11 He put the rest of the men under the command of his brother A·bishʹai, in order to draw them up in battle formation to meet the Amʹmon·ites.
12 Then he said: “If the Syrians become too strong for me, then you must come to my rescue; but if the Amʹmon·ites become too strong for you, I will rescue you.
13 We must be strong and courageous for our people and for the cities of our God, and Jehovah will do what is good in his eyes.”
14 Then Joʹab and his men advanced to meet the Syrians in battle, and they fled from before him.
15 When the Amʹmon·ites saw that the Syrians had fled, they also fled from his brother A·bishʹai and went into the city. After that Joʹab came to Jerusalem.
16 When the Syrians saw that they had been defeated by Israel, they sent messengers to summon the Syrians in the region of the River, with Shoʹphach the chief of the army of Had·ad·eʹzer leading them.
17 When the report was made to David, he immediately gathered all Israel and crossed the Jordan and came to them and drew up in battle formation against them. David drew up in battle formation to meet the Syrians, and they fought against him.
18 But the Syrians fled from Israel; and David killed 7,000 charioteers and 40,000 foot soldiers of the Syrians, and he put Shoʹphach the chief of the army to death.
19 When the servants of Had·ad·eʹzer saw that they had been defeated by Israel, they promptly made peace with David and became his subjects; and Syria did not want to help the Amʹmon·ites anymore.
22 David then said: “This is the house of Jehovah the true God, and this is an altar for burnt offering for Israel.”
2 David then gave orders to bring together the foreign residents who were in the land of Israel, and he assigned them to be stonecutters to cut and shape stones for building the house of the true God.
3 David also prepared iron in great quantity for nails for the doors of the gates and for clamps, and so much copper that it was beyond weighing,
4 and also cedar timbers without number, for the Si·doʹni·ans and the Tyrʹi·ans brought great quantities of cedar timbers to David.
5 And David said: “My son Solʹo·mon is young and inexperienced, and the house to be built for Jehovah is to be exceedingly magnificent, so that its fame and beauty will be known in all lands. Therefore, I will make preparation for him.” So David prepared materials in great quantity before his death.
6 Moreover, he summoned his son Solʹo·mon and instructed him to build a house for Jehovah the God of Israel.
7 David told his son Solʹo·mon: “As for me, it was my heart’s desire to build a house for the name of Jehovah my God.
8 But Jehovah’s word came to me, saying, ‘You have shed a great deal of blood, and you have fought great wars. You will not build a house for my name, for you have shed a great deal of blood on the earth before me.
9 Look! You will have a son who will be a man of peace, and I will give him rest from all his enemies who surround him, for Solʹo·mon will be his name and I will grant Israel peace and quiet in his days.
10 He is the one who will build a house for my name. He will become my son, and I will be his father. I will firmly establish the throne of his kingship over Israel forever.’
11 “Now, my son, may Jehovah be with you, and may you be successful and build the house of Jehovah your God, just as he has spoken concerning you.
12 Only may Jehovah give you discretion and understanding when he gives you authority over Israel, so that you may keep the law of Jehovah your God.
13 Then you will be successful if you carefully observe the regulations and the judgments that Jehovah ordered Moses to give Israel. Be courageous and strong. Do not be afraid or be terrified.
14 Here I have taken great pains to prepare for Jehovah’s house 100,000 talents of gold and 1,000,000 talents of silver and such great quantities of copper and iron that they cannot be weighed, and I have prepared timbers and stones, but you will add to them.
15 A great number of workmen are with you—stonecutters, stonemasons, woodworkers, and all kinds of skilled workers.
16 The gold, silver, copper, and iron are beyond measure. Get up and begin the work, and may Jehovah be with you.”
17 David then ordered all the princes of Israel to help his son Solʹo·mon:
18 “Is not Jehovah your God with you, and has he not given you rest on every side? For he handed over to me the inhabitants of the land, and the land has been subdued before Jehovah and before his people.
19 Now determine with all your heart and soul to seek Jehovah your God, and start building the sanctuary of Jehovah the true God, in order to bring the ark of the covenant of Jehovah and the holy utensils of the true God to the house built for the name of Jehovah.”
28 David then congregated all the princes of Israel to Jerusalem: the princes of the tribes, the chiefs of the divisions ministering to the king, the chiefs of thousands and the chiefs of hundreds, the chiefs of all the property and livestock of the king and of his sons, together with the court officials and every mighty and capable man.
2 Then King David rose to his feet and said: “Hear me, my brothers and my people. It was my heart’s desire to build a house as the resting-place for the ark of the covenant of Jehovah and as the footstool of our God, and I made preparations to build.
3 But the true God told me, ‘You will not build a house for my name, for you are a man of wars, and you have shed blood.’
4 However, Jehovah the God of Israel chose me out of all the house of my father to become king over Israel forever, for he chose Judah as leader and of the house of Judah, my father’s house, and of my father’s sons, I was the one whom he approved, to make me king over all Israel.
5 And of all my sons—for Jehovah has given me many sons—he chose my son Solʹo·mon to sit on the throne of the kingship of Jehovah over Israel.
6 “He said to me, ‘Your son Solʹo·mon is the one who will build my house and my courtyards, for I have chosen him as my son and I will become his father.
7 I will firmly establish his kingship forever if he resolutely observes my commandments and my judicial decisions, as he is now doing.’
8 So I say before the eyes of all Israel, Jehovah’s congregation, and in the ears of our God: Carefully observe and search for all the commandments of Jehovah your God, so that you may possess the good land and pass it on as a permanent inheritance to your sons after you.
9 “And you, Solʹo·mon my son, know the God of your father and serve him with a complete heart and with a delightful soul, for Jehovah searches through all hearts, and he discerns every inclination of the thoughts. If you search for him, he will let himself be found by you, but if you leave him, he will reject you forever.
10 See, now, for Jehovah has chosen you to build a house as a sanctuary. Be courageous and go to work.”
11 David then gave to his son Solʹo·mon the architectural plan of the porch and of its houses, its storerooms, its roof chambers, its inner rooms, and the house of the propitiatory cover.
12 He gave him the architectural plan of everything that had been conveyed to him through inspiration for the courtyards of Jehovah’s house, for all the dining rooms around it, for the treasuries of the house of the true God, and for the treasuries of the things made holy;
13 also for the divisions of the priests and of the Levites, for all the duties of the service of Jehovah’s house, and for all the utensils of the service of Jehovah’s house;
14 also for the weight of the gold, the gold for all the utensils for the different services, the weight of all the utensils of silver, and for all the utensils for the different services;
15 also the weight for the gold lampstands and their gold lamps, the weight of the different lampstands and their lamps, and the weight of the silver lampstands, for each lampstand and its lamps according to its use;
16 also the weight of the gold for the tables of the layer bread, for each table, as well as the silver for the tables of silver,
17 for the forks, the bowls, the pitchers of pure gold, and the weight of the small gold bowls, for each small bowl, and the weight of the small silver bowls, for each small bowl.
18 He also gave the weight for the refined gold for the incense altar and for the representation of the chariot, namely, the cherubs of gold that spread their wings out and overshadow the ark of the covenant of Jehovah.
19 David said: “The hand of Jehovah was upon me, and he gave me insight to put all the details of the architectural plan in writing.”
20 Then David said to his son Solʹo·mon: “Be courageous and strong and go to work. Do not be afraid or be terrified, for Jehovah God, my God, is with you. He will not desert you or abandon you, but he will be with you until all the work for the service of Jehovah’s house is finished.
21 And here are the divisions of the priests and of the Levites for all the service of the house of the true God. You have willing, skilled workers to perform every kind of service, as well as the princes and all the people who will carry out all your instructions.”
2 Solʹo·mon now gave the order to build a house for Jehovah’s name and a house for his kingdom.
2 Solʹo·mon enlisted 70,000 men as common laborers, 80,000 men as stonecutters in the mountains, and 3,600 as overseers over them.
3 Further, Solʹo·mon sent word to Hiʹram the king of Tyre: “Do for me as you did for David my father when you sent him cedarwood to build a house to live in.
4 Now I am building a house for the name of Jehovah my God, to sanctify it to him, to burn perfumed incense before him, and also for the constant layer bread and the burnt offerings, morning and evening, on the Sabbaths, on the new moons, and at the festival seasons of Jehovah our God. This is a lasting obligation for Israel.
5 The house that I am building will be great, for our God is greater than all the other gods.
6 And who is up to the task of building him a house? For the heavens and the heaven of the heavens cannot contain him, so who am I that I should build him a house except as a place for making sacrifices smoke before him?
7 Now send me a craftsman who is skilled in working in gold, silver, copper, iron, purple wool, crimson, and blue thread and who knows how to cut engravings. He will work in Judah and in Jerusalem with my skilled craftsmen, whom David my father has provided.
8 And send me timbers of cedar, juniper, and algum from Lebʹa·non, for I well know that your servants are experienced at cutting down the trees of Lebʹa·non. My servants will work along with your servants
9 to prepare for me great quantities of timber, for the house that I am to build will be extraordinarily great.
10 Now look! I will supply the food for your servants, the woodcutters who cut down the trees: 20,000 cors of wheat, 20,000 cors of barley, 20,000 baths of wine, and 20,000 baths of oil.”
11 At that Hiʹram the king of Tyre sent this written message to Solʹo·mon: “Because Jehovah loves his people, he has made you their king.”
12 Hiʹram then said: “May Jehovah the God of Israel be praised, who made the heavens and the earth, because he has given to King David a wise son, endowed with discretion and understanding, who will build a house for Jehovah and a house for his kingdom.
13 Now I am sending a skilled craftsman, endowed with understanding, Hiʹram-aʹbi,
14 who is the son of a Danʹite woman but whose father was a man of Tyre; he has experience in working in gold, silver, copper, iron, stones, timbers, purple wool, blue thread, fine fabric, and crimson. He can do every sort of engraving and make any design he is given. He will work with your own skilled craftsmen and the skilled craftsmen of my lord David your father.
15 Now let my lord send the wheat, barley, oil, and wine he has promised to his servants.
16 And we will cut down trees from Lebʹa·non, as many as you need, and we will bring them to you as rafts by sea to Jopʹpa; and you will take them up to Jerusalem.”
17 Solʹo·mon then took a count of all the men who were foreign residents in the land of Israel, after the census taken by David his father, and there were found 153,600.
18 So he assigned 70,000 of them as common laborers, 80,000 as stonecutters in the mountains, and 3,600 as overseers for putting the people to work.
6 At that time Solʹo·mon said: “Jehovah said he would reside in the thick gloom.
2 Now I have built a lofty house for you, an established place for you to dwell in forever.”
3 Then the king turned around and began to bless all the congregation of Israel while all the congregation of Israel stood.
4 He said: “May Jehovah the God of Israel be praised, the one who by his own mouth promised my father David and by his own hands has given fulfillment, saying,
5 ‘From the day I brought my people out of the land of Egypt, I have not chosen a city out of all the tribes of Israel in which to build a house for my name to remain there, and I have not chosen a man to become leader over my people Israel.
6 But I have chosen Jerusalem for my name to remain there, and I have chosen David to be over my people Israel.’
7 And it was the heart’s desire of my father David to build a house for the name of Jehovah the God of Israel.
8 But Jehovah said to my father David, ‘It was your heart’s desire to build a house for my name, and you did well to desire this in your heart.
9 However, you will not build the house, but your own son who is to be born to you is the one who will build the house for my name.’
10 Jehovah has carried out the promise that he made, for I have succeeded my father David and I sit on the throne of Israel, just as Jehovah promised. I have also built the house for the name of Jehovah the God of Israel,
11 and there I have placed the Ark containing the covenant that Jehovah made with the people of Israel.”
12 Then he stood before the altar of Jehovah in front of all the congregation of Israel, and he spread out his hands.
13 (For Solʹo·mon had made a platform of copper and put it in the middle of the court. It was five cubits long, five cubits wide, and three cubits high; and he stood on it.) And he knelt down in front of all the congregation of Israel and spread his hands out to the heavens,
14 and he said: “O Jehovah the God of Israel, there is no God like you in the heavens or on the earth, keeping the covenant and showing loyal love to your servants who are walking before you with all their heart.
15 You have kept the promise that you made to your servant David my father. You made the promise with your own mouth, and this day you have fulfilled it with your own hand.
16 And now, O Jehovah the God of Israel, keep the promise you made to your servant David my father when you said: ‘There will never fail to be a man of your line before me to sit on the throne of Israel, if only your sons will pay attention to their way by walking in my law, just as you have walked before me.’
17 And now, O Jehovah the God of Israel, let the promise that you made to your servant David prove trustworthy.
18 “But will God really dwell with mankind on the earth? Look! The heavens, yes, the heaven of the heavens, cannot contain you; how much less, then, this house that I have built!
19 Now pay attention to the prayer of your servant and to his request for favor, O Jehovah my God, and listen to the cry for help and to the prayer that your servant is praying before you.
20 May your eyes be open toward this house day and night, toward the place where you said that you would put your name, to listen to the prayer that your servant prays toward this place.
21 And listen to your servant’s pleas for help and to the pleas of your people Israel when they pray toward this place, and may you hear from your dwelling place, from the heavens; yes, may you hear and forgive.
22 “If a man sins against his fellow man and is made to take an oath and is brought under liability to the oath, and while under the oath he comes before your altar in this house,
23 may you then hear from the heavens and act and judge your servants by paying back the wicked one and bringing what he did on his own head and by pronouncing the righteous one innocent and rewarding him according to his own righteousness.
24 “And if your people Israel are defeated by an enemy because they kept sinning against you, and they return and glorify your name and pray and beg for favor before you in this house,
25 may you then hear from the heavens and forgive the sin of your people Israel and bring them back to the land that you gave to them and their forefathers.
26 “When the heavens are shut up and there is no rain because they kept sinning against you, and they pray toward this place and glorify your name and turn back from their sin because you humbled them,
27 may you then hear from the heavens and forgive the sin of your servants, of your people Israel, for you will instruct them about the good way in which they should walk; and bring rain on your land that you gave to your people as an inheritance.
28 “If a famine occurs in the land, or a pestilence, a scorching blight, mildew, swarming locusts, or voracious locusts or if their enemies besiege them in any of the cities of the land or if any other sort of plague or disease occurs,
29 whatever prayer, whatever request for favor may be made by any man or by all your people Israel (for each one knows his own plague and his own pain) when they spread out their hands toward this house,
30 then may you hear from the heavens, your dwelling place, and may you forgive; and reward each one according to all his ways, for you know his heart (you alone truly know the human heart),
31 so that they may fear you by walking in your ways all the days they live on the land that you gave to our forefathers.
32 “Also concerning the foreigner who is not part of your people Israel and who comes from a distant land because of your great name and your mighty hand and your outstretched arm, and he comes and prays toward this house,
33 may you then listen from the heavens, your dwelling place, and do all that the foreigner asks of you, so that all the peoples of the earth may know your name and fear you, as your people Israel do, and may know that your name has been called on this house that I have built.
34 “If your people go to war against their enemies in the way that you send them and they pray to you in the direction of this city that you have chosen and toward the house that I have built for your name,
35 then hear from the heavens their prayer and their request for favor and execute judgment for them.
36 “If they sin against you (for there is no man who does not sin), and you are furious with them and you abandon them to an enemy, and their captors carry them off captive to a land, far or near,
37 and they come to their senses in the land where they were carried off captive, and they return to you and beg you for favor in the land where they are captives, saying, ‘We have sinned and done wrong; we have acted wickedly,’
38 and they return to you with all their heart and all their soul in the land of their captivity where they were carried off captive, and they pray in the direction of their land that you gave to their forefathers and the city that you have chosen and the house that I have built for your name,
39 then hear from the heavens, your dwelling place, their prayer and their request for favor, and execute judgment for them and forgive your people who have sinned against you.
40 “Now, O my God, please, may your eyes be opened and your ears attentive to the prayer offered in this place.
41 And now go up, O Jehovah God, to your resting-place, you and the Ark of your strength. Let your priests, O Jehovah God, be clothed with salvation, and let your loyal ones rejoice in your goodness.
42 O Jehovah God, do not reject your anointed one. May you remember your loyal love to David your servant.”
7 Now as soon as Solʹo·mon had finished praying, fire came down from the heavens and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices, and Jehovah’s glory filled the house.
2 The priests were unable to enter the house of Jehovah because Jehovah’s glory had filled the house of Jehovah.
3 And all the people of Israel were looking on when the fire came down and the glory of Jehovah was upon the house, and they bowed low with their faces to the ground on the pavement and prostrated themselves and thanked Jehovah, “for he is good; his loyal love endures forever.”
4 Now the king and all the people offered sacrifices before Jehovah.
5 King Solʹo·mon offered the sacrifice of 22,000 cattle and 120,000 sheep. Thus the king and all the people inaugurated the house of the true God.
6 The priests were standing at their posts of duty, as were the Levites who had the instruments used to accompany the song to Jehovah. (King David had made these instruments for giving thanks to Jehovah—“for his loyal love endures forever”—when David would offer praise with them.) And the priests were loudly sounding the trumpets in front of them, while all the Israelites were standing.
7 Then Solʹo·mon sanctified the middle of the courtyard that was before the house of Jehovah, for there he had to offer up the burnt offerings and the fat pieces of the communion sacrifices, because the copper altar that Solʹo·mon had made could not contain the burnt sacrifices, the grain offerings, and the fat pieces.
8 At that time Solʹo·mon held the festival for seven days together with all Israel, a very great congregation from Leʹbo-haʹmath down to the Wadi of Egypt.
9 But on the eighth day they held a solemn assembly, because they had held the inauguration of the altar for seven days and the festival for seven days.
10 Then on the 23rd day of the seventh month, he sent the people away to their homes rejoicing and feeling glad of heart over the goodness that Jehovah had shown to David and Solʹo·mon and Israel his people.
11 Thus Solʹo·mon finished the house of Jehovah and the house of the king; and everything that came into Solʹo·mon’s heart to do regarding the house of Jehovah and his own house he accomplished successfully.
12 Jehovah then appeared to Solʹo·mon during the night and said to him: “I have heard your prayer, and I have chosen this place for myself as a house of sacrifice.
13 When I shut up the heavens and there is no rain and when I command the grasshoppers to devour the land and if I send a pestilence among my people,
14 if my people on whom my name has been called humble themselves and pray and seek my face and turn away from their evil ways, then I will hear from the heavens and forgive their sin and heal their land.
15 Now my eyes will be open and my ears attentive to prayer at this place.
16 And now I have chosen and sanctified this house so that my name may be there permanently, and my eyes and my heart will always be there.
17 “And you, if you walk before me as your father David walked by doing everything I have commanded you, and you obey my regulations and my judgments,
18 then I will establish the throne of your kingship, just as I made a covenant with your father David, saying, ‘There will never fail to be a man of your line ruling over Israel.’
19 But if you turn away and forsake my statutes and my commandments that I have put before you and you go and serve other gods and bow down to them,
20 I will uproot Israel from my land that I have given them, and this house that I have sanctified for my name I will cast out of my sight, and I will make it an object of scorn and a cause for ridicule among all the peoples.
21 And this house will become heaps of ruins. Everyone passing by it will stare in amazement and will say, ‘Why did Jehovah do that to this land and this house?’
22 Then they will say, ‘It was because they abandoned Jehovah the God of their forefathers, who had brought them out of the land of Egypt, and they embraced other gods and bowed down to them and served them. That is why he brought all this calamity on them.’”
10 Re·ho·boʹam went to Sheʹchem, for all Israel had come to Sheʹchem to make him king.
2 As soon as Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat heard of it (he was still in Egypt because he had fled on account of King Solʹo·mon), Jer·o·boʹam came back from Egypt.
3 Then they sent for him, and Jer·o·boʹam and all Israel came to Re·ho·boʹam and said:
4 “Your father made our yoke harsh. But if you make the harsh service of your father easier and you lighten the heavy yoke he put on us, we will serve you.”
5 At this he said to them: “Return to me after three days.” So the people went away.
6 King Re·ho·boʹam then consulted with the older men who had served his father Solʹo·mon while he was alive, saying: “What advice would you give on how to reply to this people?”
7 They answered him: “If you are good to this people and please them and give them a favorable answer, they will always be your servants.”
8 However, he rejected the advice that the older men gave him, and he consulted with the young men who had grown up with him and who were now his attendants.
9 He asked them: “What advice do you offer on how we should reply to this people who have said to me, ‘Make the yoke your father put on us lighter’?”
10 The young men who had grown up with him said to him: “This is what you should say to the people who have said to you, ‘Your father made our yoke heavy, but you should make it lighter for us’; this is what you should tell them, ‘My little finger will be thicker than my father’s hips.
11 My father imposed a heavy yoke on you, but I will add to your yoke. My father punished you with whips, but I will do so with scourges.’”
12 Jer·o·boʹam and all the people came to Re·ho·boʹam on the third day, just as the king had said: “Return to me on the third day.”
13 But the king answered them harshly. Thus King Re·ho·boʹam rejected the advice of the older men.
14 He spoke to them according to the advice of the young men, saying: “I will make your yoke heavier, and I will add to it. My father punished you with whips, but I will do so with scourges.”
15 So the king did not listen to the people, for this turn of events was caused by the true God, in order to carry out the word that Jehovah had spoken through A·hiʹjah the Shiʹlo·nite to Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat.
16 As for all Israel, because the king refused to listen to them, the people replied to the king: “What share do we have in David? We have no inheritance in the son of Jesʹse. Each one to your gods, O Israel! Now look after your own house, O David.” With that all Israel returned to their homes.
17 But Re·ho·boʹam continued to reign over the Israelites living in the cities of Judah.
18 Then King Re·ho·boʹam sent Ha·doʹram, who was in charge of those conscripted for forced labor, but the Israelites stoned him to death. King Re·ho·boʹam managed to mount his chariot to flee to Jerusalem.
19 And the Israelites have been in revolt against the house of David down to this day.
16 In the 36th year of the reign of Aʹsa, King Baʹa·sha of Israel came up against Judah and began to build up Raʹmah to prevent anyone from going out or coming in to King Aʹsa of Judah.
2 At that Aʹsa brought out silver and gold from the treasuries of Jehovah’s house and the king’s house and sent them to King Ben-haʹdad of Syria, who was dwelling in Damascus, saying:
3 “There is a treaty between me and you and between my father and your father. I am sending you silver and gold. Come, break your treaty with King Baʹa·sha of Israel, so that he will withdraw from me.”
4 Ben-haʹdad listened to King Aʹsa and sent the chiefs of his armies against the cities of Israel, and they struck down Iʹjon, Dan, Aʹbel-maʹim, and all the storage places of the cities of Naphʹta·li.
5 When Baʹa·sha heard of it, he immediately quit building Raʹmah and abandoned his work on it.
6 King Aʹsa then took all Judah, and they carried off the stones and timbers of Raʹmah that Baʹa·sha had been building with, and with them he built up Geʹba and Mizʹpah.
7 At that time Ha·naʹni the seer came to King Aʹsa of Judah and said to him: “Because you relied on the king of Syria and did not rely on Jehovah your God, the army of the king of Syria has escaped out of your hand.
8 Were not the E·thi·oʹpi·ans and the Libʹy·ans a very great army with many chariots and horsemen? But because you relied on Jehovah, he gave them into your hand.
9 For the eyes of Jehovah are roving about through all the earth to show his strength in behalf of those whose heart is complete toward him. You have acted foolishly in this matter; from now on there will be wars against you.”
10 However, Aʹsa became offended at the seer and put him in prison because he was enraged at him over this. And Aʹsa began to mistreat others among the people at that same time.
11 Now the history of Aʹsa, from beginning to end, is written in the Book of the Kings of Judah and of Israel.
12 In the 39th year of his reign, Aʹsa developed an ailment in his feet until he became very sick; and even in his sickness, he turned, not to Jehovah, but to the healers.
13 Then Aʹsa was laid to rest with his forefathers; he died in the 41st year of his reign.
14 So they buried him in the grand burial place that he had excavated for himself in the City of David, and they laid him on a bier that had been filled with balsam oil and different sorts of ingredients mixed into a specially made ointment. Further, they made an extraordinarily great funeral burning for him.
17 And his son Je·hoshʹa·phat became king in his place, and he strengthened his position over Israel.
2 He stationed military forces in all the fortified cities of Judah and put garrisons in the land of Judah and in the cities of Eʹphra·im that Aʹsa his father had captured.
3 Jehovah continued with Je·hoshʹa·phat because he walked in the former ways of his forefather David and did not search for the Baʹals.
4 For he searched for the God of his father and followed his commandment and not the practices of Israel.
5 Jehovah kept the kingdom firmly established in his hand; and all Judah continued to give gifts to Je·hoshʹa·phat, and he had riches and glory in abundance.
6 His heart became bold in the ways of Jehovah, and he even removed the high places and the sacred poles from Judah.
7 In the third year of his reign he sent for his princes, Ben-haʹil, O·ba·diʹah, Zech·a·riʹah, Ne·thanʹel, and Mi·caiʹah, to teach in the cities of Judah.
8 There were Levites with them: She·maiʹah, Neth·a·niʹah, Zeb·a·diʹah, Asʹa·hel, She·mirʹa·moth, Je·honʹa·than, Ad·o·niʹjah, To·biʹjah, and Tob-ad·o·niʹjah, and along with them E·lishʹa·ma and Je·hoʹram the priests.
9 They began teaching in Judah, taking with them the book of Jehovah’s Law, and they went around through all the cities of Judah teaching among the people.
10 And the dread of Jehovah came upon all the kingdoms of the lands surrounding Judah, and they did not fight against Je·hoshʹa·phat.
11 And the Phi·lisʹtines brought to Je·hoshʹa·phat gifts and money as tribute. The Arabs brought him 7,700 rams and 7,700 male goats from their flocks.
12 Je·hoshʹa·phat grew greater and greater, and he continued building fortified places and storage cities in Judah.
13 He carried out extensive projects in the cities of Judah, and he had soldiers, mighty warriors, in Jerusalem.
14 These were grouped by their paternal houses: of Judah the chiefs of thousands, Adʹnah the chief, and with him were 300,000 mighty warriors.
15 And under his command was Je·ho·haʹnan the chief, and with him were 280,000.
16 And also under his command was Am·a·siʹah the son of Zichʹri, who volunteered for Jehovah’s service, and with him were 200,000 mighty warriors.
17 And out of Benjamin was E·liʹa·da, a mighty warrior, and with him were 200,000 men equipped with the bow and shield.
18 And under his command was Je·hozʹa·bad, and with him were 180,000 men equipped for the army.
19 These were ministering to the king in addition to those whom the king put in the fortified cities throughout all Judah.
19 Then King Je·hoshʹa·phat of Judah returned safely to his own house in Jerusalem.
2 Jeʹhu the son of Ha·naʹni the visionary went out to meet him and said to King Je·hoshʹa·phat: “Is it the wicked you should be helping, and is it those who hate Jehovah you should love? Because of this the indignation of Jehovah is against you.
3 Nevertheless, there are good things that have been found in you, because you cleared out the sacred poles from the land and you have prepared your heart to search for the true God.”
4 Je·hoshʹa·phat continued living in Jerusalem, and he went out again among the people from Beʹer-sheʹba to the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, to bring them back to Jehovah the God of their forefathers.
5 He also appointed judges throughout the land in all the fortified cities of Judah, city by city.
6 And he said to the judges: “Pay attention to what you are doing, for you do not judge for man but for Jehovah, and he is with you when you pass judgment.
7 Now let the fear of Jehovah be upon you. Be careful about what you do, for with Jehovah our God there is no injustice, no partiality, no bribe-taking.”
8 In Jerusalem also, Je·hoshʹa·phat appointed some of the Levites and the priests and some of the heads of the paternal houses of Israel to serve as judges for Jehovah and to settle legal cases for the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
9 And he commanded them: “This is what you should do in the fear of Jehovah, with faithfulness and a complete heart:
10 Whenever your brothers living in their cities bring a legal case that involves the shedding of blood or a question about a law, a commandment, regulations, or judgments, you should warn them so that they may not become guilty before Jehovah; otherwise his indignation will come against you and your brothers. This is what you should do, so that you may not incur guilt.
11 Here is Am·a·riʹah the chief priest who is over you for every matter of Jehovah. Zeb·a·diʹah the son of Ishʹma·el is the leader of the house of Judah for every matter pertaining to the king. And the Levites will serve as officers for you. Be strong and act, and let Jehovah be with those who do what is good.”
23 In the seventh year, Je·hoiʹa·da acted courageously and made a pact with the chiefs of hundreds, namely, Az·a·riʹah the son of Je·roʹham, Ishʹma·el the son of Je·ho·haʹnan, Az·a·riʹah the son of Oʹbed, Ma·a·seiʹah the son of A·daiʹah, and E·li·shaʹphat the son of Zichʹri.
2 Then they went throughout Judah and gathered together the Levites from all the cities of Judah and the heads of the paternal houses of Israel. When they came to Jerusalem,
3 the entire congregation made a covenant with the king in the house of the true God, after which he said to them: “Look! The king’s son will reign, just as Jehovah promised concerning the sons of David.
4 This is what you are to do: One third of the priests and of the Levites who will be on duty on the Sabbath will be doorkeepers;
5 another third will be at the house of the king, and the other third will be at the Gate of the Foundation, and all the people will be in the courtyards of the house of Jehovah.
6 Do not let anyone enter the house of Jehovah except the priests and the Levites who are ministering. These may enter because they are a holy group, and all the people will keep the obligation to Jehovah.
7 The Levites must surround the king on every side, each with his weapons in hand. Anyone entering the house will be put to death. Stay with the king wherever he goes.”
8 The Levites and all Judah did exactly what Je·hoiʹa·da the priest had commanded. So each one took his men who were on duty on the Sabbath, together with those who were off duty on the Sabbath, for Je·hoiʹa·da the priest had not dismissed the divisions from their duty.
9 Je·hoiʹa·da the priest then gave the chiefs of hundreds the spears and the bucklers and the circular shields that had belonged to King David, which were in the house of the true God.
10 He then stationed all the people, each with his weapon in hand, from the right side of the house to the left side of the house, by the altar and by the house, all around the king.
11 Then they brought the king’s son out and put on him the crown and the Testimony and made him king, and Je·hoiʹa·da and his sons anointed him. Then they said: “Long live the king!”
12 When Ath·a·liʹah heard the sound of the people running and praising the king, she immediately came to the people at the house of Jehovah.
13 Then she saw the king standing there by his pillar at the entrance. The princes and the trumpeters were with the king, and all the people of the land were rejoicing and blowing the trumpets, and the singers with musical instruments were leading the praises. At this Ath·a·liʹah ripped her garments apart and cried out: “Conspiracy! Conspiracy!”
14 But Je·hoiʹa·da the priest brought out the chiefs of hundreds, those appointed over the army, and said to them: “Take her out from among the ranks, and if anyone follows her, put him to death with the sword!” For the priest had said: “Do not put her to death in the house of Jehovah.”
15 So they seized her, and when she reached the entrance of the Horse Gate of the king’s house, they immediately put her to death there.
16 Then Je·hoiʹa·da made a covenant between himself and all the people and the king, that they would continue as the people of Jehovah.
17 After that all the people came to the house of Baʹal and tore it down, and they smashed his altars and his images, and they killed Matʹtan the priest of Baʹal in front of the altars.
18 Then Je·hoiʹa·da put the oversight of the house of Jehovah in the hands of the priests and the Levites, whom David had assigned in divisions over the house of Jehovah to offer up the burnt sacrifices of Jehovah according to what is written in the Law of Moses, with rejoicing and with song, as directed by David.
19 He also stationed the gatekeepers by the gates of the house of Jehovah, so that no one unclean in any respect could enter.
20 He now took the chiefs of hundreds, the nobles, the rulers of the people, and all the people of the land and escorted the king down from the house of Jehovah. Then they came through the upper gate to the king’s house and seated the king on the throne of the kingdom.
21 So all the people of the land rejoiced and the city was quiet, for they had put Ath·a·liʹah to death with the sword.
30 Hez·e·kiʹah sent word to all Israel and Judah, and even wrote letters to Eʹphra·im and Ma·nasʹseh, to come to the house of Jehovah in Jerusalem to observe the Passover to Jehovah the God of Israel.
2 However, the king, his princes, and the whole congregation in Jerusalem decided to observe the Passover in the second month,
3 for they had not been able to observe it at the regular time, because not enough priests had sanctified themselves nor had the people gathered in Jerusalem.
4 This arrangement seemed right in the eyes of the king and the entire congregation.
5 So they decided to make an announcement throughout Israel, from Beʹer-sheʹba to Dan, that the people should come and observe the Passover to Jehovah the God of Israel at Jerusalem, for as a group they had not observed it according to what is written.
6 Then the couriers went throughout all Israel and Judah with the letters from the king and his princes, as the king had commanded, saying: “People of Israel, return to Jehovah the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, so that he may return to the remnant who escaped out of the hand of the kings of As·syrʹi·a.
7 Do not be like your forefathers and your brothers who acted unfaithfully toward Jehovah the God of their forefathers, so that he made them an object of horror, just as you are seeing.
8 Now do not be obstinate like your forefathers. Submit to Jehovah and come to his sanctuary that he has sanctified forever and serve Jehovah your God, so that his burning anger may turn away from you.
9 For when you return to Jehovah, your brothers and your sons will be shown mercy by their captors and will be allowed to return to this land, for Jehovah your God is compassionate and merciful, and he will not turn his face away from you if you return to him.”
10 So the couriers went from city to city throughout the land of Eʹphra·im and Ma·nasʹseh, even to Zebʹu·lun, but the people were making fun of them and mocking them.
11 However, some individuals from Ashʹer, Ma·nasʹseh, and Zebʹu·lun humbled themselves and came to Jerusalem.
12 The hand of the true God was also in Judah to unite them to carry out what the king and the princes had commanded by the word of Jehovah.
13 A multitude of people gathered together at Jerusalem to observe the Festival of Unleavened Bread in the second month; it was a very large congregation.
14 They rose up and removed the altars that were in Jerusalem, and they removed all the incense altars and threw them into the Kidʹron Valley.
15 Then they slaughtered the Passover sacrifice on the 14th day of the second month. The priests and the Levites felt ashamed, so they sanctified themselves and brought burnt offerings to the house of Jehovah.
16 They took their customary places, according to the Law of Moses the man of the true God; then the priests sprinkled the blood received from the hand of the Levites.
17 There were many in the congregation who had not sanctified themselves, and the Levites were in charge of slaughtering the Passover sacrifices for all who were not clean, to sanctify them to Jehovah.
18 For a great number of the people, especially those from Eʹphra·im, Ma·nasʹseh, Isʹsa·char, and Zebʹu·lun, had not cleansed themselves, but they still ate the Passover, contrary to what is written. But Hez·e·kiʹah prayed for them, saying: “May Jehovah, who is good, make allowance for
19 everyone who has prepared his heart to search for the true God, Jehovah, the God of his forefathers, although he has not been purified according to the standard of holiness.”
20 And Jehovah listened to Hez·e·kiʹah and pardoned the people.
21 So the Israelites who were in Jerusalem observed the Festival of Unleavened Bread for seven days with great rejoicing, and the Levites and the priests were praising Jehovah day by day, loudly playing their instruments to Jehovah.
22 Moreover, Hez·e·kiʹah spoke to and encouraged all the Levites who served Jehovah with discretion. And they ate throughout the festival for seven days, sacrificing communion sacrifices and giving thanks to Jehovah the God of their forefathers.
23 Then all the congregation decided to observe it for seven more days, so they observed it for seven more days with rejoicing.
24 And King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah contributed for the congregation 1,000 bulls and 7,000 sheep, and the princes contributed for the congregation 1,000 bulls and 10,000 sheep; and priests were sanctifying themselves in great number.
25 And all the congregation of Judah, the priests, the Levites, all the congregation that came from Israel, and the foreign residents who came from the land of Israel and those living in Judah continued rejoicing.
26 And there was great rejoicing in Jerusalem, for from the days of Solʹo·mon the son of David the king of Israel, nothing like this had happened in Jerusalem.
27 Finally the Levite priests stood up and blessed the people; and God heard their voice, and their prayer reached his holy dwelling, the heavens.
32 After these things and these acts of faithfulness, King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a came and invaded Judah. He besieged the fortified cities, intent on breaking through and capturing them.
2 When Hez·e·kiʹah saw that Sen·nachʹer·ib had come and intended to wage war against Jerusalem,
3 he decided, after consulting with his princes and his warriors, to stop up the waters of the springs outside the city, and they gave him their support.
4 Many people were gathered together, and they stopped up all the springs and the stream that flowed through the land, saying: “Why should the kings of As·syrʹi·a come and find plenty of water?”
5 Furthermore, with determination he rebuilt the entire broken-down wall and raised towers on it, and outside he made another wall. He also repaired the Mound of the City of David, and he made a large number of weapons and shields.
6 He then appointed military chiefs over the people and assembled them at the public square of the city gate and encouraged them, saying:
7 “Be courageous and strong. Do not be afraid or be terrified because of the king of As·syrʹi·a and all the multitude with him, for there are more with us than there are with him.
8 With him is an arm of flesh, but with us is Jehovah our God to help us and to fight our battles.” And the people were strengthened by the words of King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah.
9 After this, while King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a was at Laʹchish with all his imperial might, he sent his servants to Jerusalem, to King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah and to all the Ju·deʹans in Jerusalem, saying:
10 “This is what King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a says, ‘In what are you trusting that you remain in Jerusalem while it is besieged?
11 Is not Hez·e·kiʹah misleading you and handing you over to die by famine and thirst, saying: “Jehovah our God will rescue us from the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a”?
12 Is this not the same Hez·e·kiʹah who removed your God’s high places and His altars and then said to Judah and Jerusalem: “You should bow down before one altar and on it you should make your sacrifices smoke”?
13 Do you not know what I and my forefathers did to all the peoples of the lands? Were the gods of the nations of the lands able to rescue their land from my hand?
14 Who among all the gods of these nations that my forefathers devoted to destruction was able to rescue his people from my hand, so that your God should be able to rescue you from my hand?
15 Now do not let Hez·e·kiʹah deceive you or mislead you like this! Do not put faith in him, for no god of any nation or kingdom was able to rescue his people from my hand and from the hand of my forefathers. How much less, then, will your own God rescue you from my hand!’”
16 His servants said even more against Jehovah the true God and against Hez·e·kiʹah his servant.
17 He also wrote letters to insult Jehovah the God of Israel and to speak against him, saying: “Like the gods of the nations of the lands who could not rescue their people from my hand, so the God of Hez·e·kiʹah will not rescue his people from my hand.”
18 They kept calling loudly in the language of the Jews to the people of Jerusalem who were on the wall, to make them afraid and to terrify them, in order to capture the city.
19 They spoke against the God of Jerusalem the same way as against the gods of the peoples of the earth, which are the work of man’s hands.
20 But King Hez·e·kiʹah and the prophet Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz kept praying about this and crying out to the heavens for help.
21 Then Jehovah sent an angel and wiped out every mighty warrior, leader, and chief in the camp of the king of As·syrʹi·a, so that he went back to his own land in disgrace. He later entered the house of his god, and there some of his own sons struck him down with the sword.
22 So Jehovah saved Hez·e·kiʹah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem from the hand of King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a and from the hand of all others and gave them rest on every side.
23 And many brought gifts to Jehovah at Jerusalem and choice things to King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah, and he was greatly respected by all the nations after that.
24 In those days Hez·e·kiʹah became sick and was at the point of death, and he prayed to Jehovah, who answered him and gave him a sign.
25 But Hez·e·kiʹah did not respond appreciatively to the good done to him, for his heart became haughty, bringing indignation against him and against Judah and Jerusalem.
26 However, Hez·e·kiʹah humbled himself for the haughtiness of his heart, he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and Jehovah’s indignation did not come upon them in the days of Hez·e·kiʹah.
27 And Hez·e·kiʹah came to have vast riches and glory; and he made storehouses for himself for silver, gold, precious stones, balsam oil, shields, and for all the desirable articles.
28 He also made storage places for the produce of grain and new wine and oil, as well as stalls for all the different kinds of livestock and stalls for the flocks.
29 He also acquired cities for himself, and an abundance of livestock, flocks, and herds, for God gave him very many possessions.
30 It was Hez·e·kiʹah who stopped up the upper source of the waters of Giʹhon and directed them straight down to the west to the City of David, and Hez·e·kiʹah was successful in every work of his.
31 However, when the spokesmen of the princes of Babylon were sent to ask him about the sign that had occurred in the land, the true God left him alone to put him to the test, to get to know all that was in his heart.
32 As for the rest of the history of Hez·e·kiʹah and his acts of loyal love, they are written in the vision of Isaiah the prophet, the son of Aʹmoz, in the Book of the Kings of Judah and of Israel.
33 Then Hez·e·kiʹah was laid to rest with his forefathers, and they buried him in the ascent to the burial places of the sons of David; and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem honored him at his death. And his son Ma·nasʹseh became king in his place.
4 When the enemies of Judah and Benjamin heard that the returned exiles were building a temple to Jehovah the God of Israel,
2 they immediately approached Ze·rubʹba·bel and the heads of the paternal houses and said to them: “Let us build along with you; for like you, we worship your God and we have been sacrificing to him since the days of King Eʹsar-hadʹdon of As·syrʹi·a, who brought us here.”
3 However, Ze·rubʹba·bel and Jeshʹu·a and the rest of the heads of the paternal houses of Israel said to them: “You have no share with us in building a house to our God, for we alone will build it to Jehovah the God of Israel, just as King Cyrus the king of Persia has commanded us.”
4 Then the people of the land were continually discouraging the people of Judah and disheartening them from building.
5 They hired advisers against them to frustrate their plans all the days of King Cyrus of Persia until the reign of King Da·riʹus of Persia.
6 At the beginning of the reign of A·has·u·eʹrus, they wrote an accusation against the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem.
7 And in the days of King Ar·ta·xerxʹes of Persia, Bishʹlam, Mithʹre·dath, Tabʹe·el, and the rest of his colleagues wrote to Ar·ta·xerxʹes the king; they translated the letter into Ar·a·maʹic, writing it with Ar·a·maʹic characters.
8  Reʹhum the chief government official and Shimʹshai the scribe wrote a letter against Jerusalem to King Ar·ta·xerxʹes, as follows:
9 (It was from Reʹhum the chief government official and Shimʹshai the scribe and the rest of their colleagues, the judges and the lesser governors, the secretaries, the people of Eʹrech, the Babylonians, the inhabitants of Suʹsa, that is, the Eʹlam·ites,
10 and the rest of the nations that the great and honorable Asʹe·nap·par took into exile and settled in the cities of Sa·marʹi·a, and the rest in the region Beyond the River, and now
11 this is a copy of the letter that they sent him.) “To King Ar·ta·xerxʹes from your servants, the men of the region Beyond the River: And now
12 let it be known to the king that the Jews who came up here from you to us have arrived at Jerusalem. They are rebuilding the rebellious and wicked city, and they are finishing the walls and repairing the foundations.
13 Now let it be known to the king that if this city should be rebuilt and its walls finished, they will not give tax, tribute, or toll, and it will result in a loss to the treasuries of the kings.
14 Since we eat the salt of the palace and it is not proper for us to see the king’s interests harmed, we have therefore sent to make this known to the king,
15 so that there may be an investigation of the book of records of your ancestors. You will find in the book of records and learn that this city is a rebellious city, injurious to kings and provinces, and within it have been those stirring up sedition from ancient times. That is why this city was destroyed.
16 We are making known to the king that if this city is rebuilt and its walls are finished, you will have no control of the region Beyond the River.”
17 The king sent word to Reʹhum the chief government official and Shimʹshai the scribe and the rest of their colleagues who were dwelling in Sa·marʹi·a and the rest of the region Beyond the River: “Greetings! And now
18 the official document that you sent us has been clearly read before me.
19 By my order an investigation was made, and it was found that from long ago the city has had uprisings against kings, and rebellions and revolts have taken place there.
20 There were powerful kings over Jerusalem who ruled the whole region Beyond the River, and tax, tribute, and toll were paid to them.
21 Now issue an order for these men to stop work, so that the city may not be rebuilt until I issue an order.
22 Be careful not to neglect acting in this regard, so that the king’s interests are not harmed any further.”
23 Now after the copy of the official document of King Ar·ta·xerxʹes had been read before Reʹhum and Shimʹshai the scribe and their colleagues, they quickly went to Jerusalem to the Jews and used force to stop them.
24 It was then that the work on the house of God, which was in Jerusalem, came to a halt; and it remained at a standstill until the second year of the reign of King Da·riʹus of Persia.
5 Then the prophets Hagʹgai and Zech·a·riʹah the grandson of Idʹdo prophesied to the Jews who were in Judah and in Jerusalem, in the name of the God of Israel who was over them.
2 It was then that Ze·rubʹba·bel the son of She·alʹti·el and Jeshʹu·a the son of Je·hozʹa·dak started to rebuild the house of God, which was in Jerusalem; and the prophets of God were with them and supported them.
3 At that time Tatʹte·nai the governor of the region Beyond the River and Sheʹthar-bozʹe·nai and their colleagues came to them and asked them: “Who issued an order to you to build this house and to finish this structure?”
4 Then they asked them: “What are the names of the men who are working on this building?”
5 But God was watching over the elders of the Jews, and they did not stop them until the report could be sent to Da·riʹus and an official document could be sent back concerning this.
6 Here is a copy of the letter that Tatʹte·nai the governor of the region Beyond the River and Sheʹthar-bozʹe·nai and his colleagues, the lesser governors of the region Beyond the River, sent to King Da·riʹus;
7 they sent the report to him, and this is what they wrote: “To King Da·riʹus: “All peace!
8 Let it be known to the king that we went to the province of Judah to the house of the great God, and it is being built with large stones rolled into place, and timbers are being laid in the walls. The work is being eagerly done by the people and is making progress through their efforts.
9 Then we questioned their elders, asking them: ‘Who issued an order to you to build this house and to finish this structure?’
10 We also asked them their names to inform you, so that we could write the names of the men who are taking the lead.
11 “This is the response they gave us: ‘We are the servants of the God of the heavens and the earth, and we are rebuilding the house that was built many years ago, which a great king of Israel built and finished.
12 However, because our fathers angered the God of the heavens, he gave them into the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, the Chal·deʹan, who demolished this house and took the people into exile to Babylon.
13 Nevertheless, in the first year of King Cyrus of Babylon, King Cyrus issued an order to rebuild this house of God.
14 Moreover, King Cyrus took out of the temple of Babylon the gold and silver vessels of the house of God that Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had taken from the temple in Jerusalem and had brought to the temple of Babylon. They were given to a man named Shesh·bazʹzar, whom Cyrus made governor.
15 Cyrus said to him: “Take these vessels. Go, deposit them in the temple that is in Jerusalem, and let the house of God be rebuilt in its former place.”
16 Then this Shesh·bazʹzar came, and he laid the foundations of the house of God, which is in Jerusalem; and it has been under construction from then until now, but it has not been completed.’
17 “Now if it seems good to the king, let an investigation be made in the royal treasury there in Babylon, to determine whether King Cyrus issued an order to rebuild that house of God in Jerusalem; and let the decision of the king concerning this be sent to us.”
9 And as soon as these things had been done, the princes approached me and said: “The people of Israel and the priests and the Levites have not separated themselves from the peoples of the lands and their detestable practices, those of the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Jebʹu·sites, the Amʹmon·ites, the Moʹab·ites, the Egyptians, and the Amʹor·ites.
2 They have taken some of their daughters as wives for themselves and for their sons. Now they, the holy offspring, have become mingled with the peoples of the lands. The princes and the deputy rulers have been the foremost offenders in this unfaithfulness.”
3 Now as soon as I heard of this, I ripped apart my garment and my sleeveless coat and pulled out some of the hair of my head and my beard, and I sat down in shock.
4 Then everyone who had reverence for the words of the God of Israel gathered around me because of the unfaithfulness of the exiled people, while I was sitting in shock until the evening grain offering.
5 And at the time of the evening grain offering, I stood up from my humiliation, with my garment and my sleeveless coat torn apart, and I got down on my knees and spread out my hands to Jehovah my God.
6 And I said: “O my God, I feel ashamed and embarrassed to raise my face to you, O my God, for our errors have multiplied over our heads and our guilt has mounted up to the heavens.
7 From the days of our forefathers until this day our guilt has been great; and because of our errors, we, our kings, and our priests have been given into the hand of the kings of the lands, to the sword, to captivity, to plunder, and to disgrace, as is the case today.
8 But now for a brief moment, favor has come from Jehovah our God by letting a remnant escape and by giving us a secure position in his holy place, to make our eyes shine, O our God, and to revive us a little in our slavery.
9 For although we are slaves, our God has not abandoned us in our slavery; but he has extended his loyal love toward us before the kings of Persia, to revive us so as to raise up the house of our God and to restore its ruins and to give us a stone wall in Judah and in Jerusalem.
10 “But now what can we say, O our God, after this? For we have left your commandments,
11 which you gave us through your servants the prophets, saying: ‘The land that you are going in to take possession of is an impure land because of the impurity of the peoples of the lands, because of their detestable practices with which they have filled it from end to end with their uncleanness.
12 Therefore, do not give your daughters to their sons, neither accept their daughters for your sons; and you must never seek their peace and their prosperity, so that you may grow strong and eat the good of the land and take possession of it for your sons forever.’
13 And after all that has come upon us for our bad deeds and our great guilt—for you, O our God, have not dealt with us according to our error, and you have allowed those of us here to escape—
14 are we to break your commandments again and form marriage alliances with the peoples who practice these detestable things? Would you not become so angry with us that you would completely destroy us, leaving no remnant or survivor?
15 O Jehovah the God of Israel, you are righteous, for we have survived as a remnant to this day. Here we are before you in our guilt, for it is impossible to stand before you because of this.”
10 While Ezʹra was praying and making confession, weeping and lying prostrate before the house of the true God, a large crowd of men, women, and children of Israel gathered around him, for the people were weeping profusely.
2 Then Shec·a·niʹah the son of Je·hiʹel of the sons of Eʹlam said to Ezʹra: “We have acted unfaithfully against our God by marrying foreign women from the peoples of the land. Despite this, there is still hope for Israel.
3 Now let us make a covenant with our God to send away all the wives and those born from them, in harmony with the direction of Jehovah and of those who have reverence for the commandment of our God. Let us act according to the Law.
4 Get up, for this matter is your responsibility, and we are with you. Be strong and take action.”
5 At that Ezʹra rose and had the chiefs of the priests, the Levites, and all Israel take an oath to do what had been said. So they took an oath.
6 Ezʹra now got up from before the house of the true God and went to the chamber of Je·ho·haʹnan the son of E·liʹa·shib. Although he went there, he ate no food and drank no water, for he was in mourning because of the unfaithfulness of the exiled people.
7 Then they made a proclamation throughout Judah and Jerusalem that all the former exiles gather together at Jerusalem;
8 and according to the decision of the princes and the elders, anyone who did not come within three days’ time would have all his goods confiscated, and he would be banished from the congregation of the exiled people.
9 So all the men of Judah and Benjamin gathered together at Jerusalem within three days, that is, in the ninth month, on the 20th day of the month. All the people were sitting in a courtyard of the house of the true God, shivering because of the matter at hand and because of the heavy rain.
10 Then Ezʹra the priest rose and said to them: “You have acted unfaithfully by marrying foreign women, and so you have added to the guilt of Israel.
11 Now make confession to Jehovah the God of your forefathers and do his will. Separate yourselves from the peoples of the land and from these foreign wives.”
12 To this the whole congregation answered with a loud voice: “It is our duty to do exactly as you say.
13 However, there are many people, and it is the rainy season. It is not possible to stand outside, and the matter will not take just one or two days, for we have rebelled extensively in this matter.
14 So, please, let our princes represent the entire congregation; and let all those in our cities who have married foreign women come at an appointed time, along with the elders and judges of each city, until we turn back the burning anger of our God from us concerning this matter.”
15 However, Jonʹa·than the son of Asʹa·hel and Jah·zeiʹah the son of Tikʹvah objected to this, and the Levites Me·shulʹlam and Shabʹbe·thai supported them.
16 But the former exiles did what was agreed on; and Ezʹra the priest and the family heads of their paternal houses, all designated by name, convened separately on the first day of the tenth month to look into the matter;
17 and by the first day of the first month they finished dealing with all the men who had married foreign women.
18 And it was discovered that some of the sons of the priests had married foreign women: of the sons of Jeshʹu·a the son of Je·hozʹa·dak and his brothers, Ma·a·seiʹah, E·li·eʹzer, Jaʹrib, and Ged·a·liʹah.
19 But they promised to send their wives away, and since they were guilty, they would offer a ram of the flock for their guilt.
20 Of the sons of Imʹmer, there were Ha·naʹni and Zeb·a·diʹah;
21 and of the sons of Haʹrim, Ma·a·seiʹah, E·liʹjah, She·maiʹah, Je·hiʹel, and Uz·ziʹah;
22 and of the sons of Pashʹhur, Eli·o·eʹnai, Ma·a·seiʹah, Ishʹma·el, Ne·thanʹel, Joʹza·bad and El·e·aʹsah.
23 And of the Levites, there were Joʹza·bad, Shimʹe·i, Ke·laiʹah (that is, Ke·liʹta), Peth·a·hiʹah, Judah, and E·li·eʹzer;
24 and of the singers, E·liʹa·shib; and of the gatekeepers, Shalʹlum, Teʹlem, and Uʹri.
25 And of Israel, of the sons of Paʹrosh, there were Ra·miʹah, Iz·ziʹah, Mal·chiʹjah, Mijʹa·min, El·e·aʹzar, Mal·chiʹjah, and Be·naiʹah;
26 and of the sons of Eʹlam, Mat·ta·niʹah, Zech·a·riʹah, Je·hiʹel, Abʹdi, Jerʹe·moth, and E·liʹjah;
27 and of the sons of Zatʹtu, Eli·o·eʹnai, E·liʹa·shib, Mat·ta·niʹah, Jerʹe·moth, Zaʹbad, and A·ziʹza;
28 and of the sons of Beʹbai, Je·ho·haʹnan, Han·a·niʹah, Zabʹbai, and Athʹlai;
29 and of the sons of Baʹni, Me·shulʹlam, Malʹluch, A·daiʹah, Jaʹshub, Sheʹal, and Jerʹe·moth;
30 and of the sons of Paʹhath-moʹab, Adʹna, Cheʹlal, Be·naiʹah, Ma·a·seiʹah, Mat·ta·niʹah, Bezʹal·el, Binʹnu·i, and Ma·nasʹseh;
31 and of the sons of Haʹrim, E·li·eʹzer, Is·shiʹjah, Mal·chiʹjah, She·maiʹah, Shimʹe·on,
32 Benjamin, Malʹluch, and Shem·a·riʹah;
33 of the sons of Haʹshum, Mat·teʹnai, Matʹtat·tah, Zaʹbad, E·liphʹe·let, Jerʹe·mai, Ma·nasʹseh, and Shimʹe·i;
34 of the sons of Baʹni, Ma·a·daʹi, Amʹram, Uʹel,
35 Be·naiʹah, Be·deiʹah, Chelʹu·hi,
36 Va·niʹah, Merʹe·moth, E·liʹa·shib,
37 Mat·ta·niʹah, Mat·teʹnai, and Jaʹa·su;
38 and of the sons of Binʹnu·i, Shimʹe·i,
39 Shel·e·miʹah, Nathan, A·daiʹah,
40 Mach·nadʹe·bai, Shaʹshai, Shaʹrai,
41 Azʹar·el, Shel·e·miʹah, Shem·a·riʹah,
42 Shalʹlum, Am·a·riʹah, and Joseph;
43 and of the sons of Neʹbo, Je·iʹel, Mat·ti·thiʹah, Zaʹbad, Ze·biʹna, Jadʹdai, Joel, and Be·naiʹah.
44 All of these had taken foreign wives, and they sent their wives away, along with their sons.
1 The words of Ne·he·miʹah the son of Hac·a·liʹah: Now in the month of Chisʹlev, in the 20th year, I was in Shuʹshan the citadel.
2 At that time Ha·naʹni, one of my brothers, arrived with other men from Judah, and I asked them about the remaining Jews who had escaped the captivity, and also about Jerusalem.
3 They replied: “Those remaining there in the province who have survived the captivity are in a terrible situation and in disgrace. The walls of Jerusalem are broken down, and its gates have been burned with fire.”
4 As soon as I heard these words, I sat down and began to weep and mourn for days, and I kept fasting and praying before the God of the heavens.
5 I said: “O Jehovah, the God of the heavens, the great and awe-inspiring God who keeps his covenant and shows loyal love to those who love him and keep his commandments,
6 please, let your ear be attentive and your eyes open to listen to the prayer of your servant that I am praying to you today, day and night, concerning your servants the Israelites, all the while confessing the sins that the people of Israel have committed against you. We have sinned, both I and the house of my father.
7 We have certainly acted corruptly against you by not keeping the commandments, regulations, and judicial decisions that you gave to your servant Moses.
8 “Remember, please, the word that you commanded your servant Moses: ‘If you act unfaithfully, I will scatter you among the peoples.
9 But if you return to me and observe my commandments and obey them, though your dispersed people should be at the end of the heavens, I will gather them from there and bring them to the place that I have chosen to have my name reside.’
10 They are your servants and your people, whom you redeemed by your great power and by your mighty hand.
11 O Jehovah, please, let your ear be attentive to the prayer of your servant and to the prayer of your servants who take delight in fearing your name, and please, grant success to your servant today, and may this man show me compassion.” Now I was cupbearer to the king.
2 In the month of Niʹsan, in the 20th year of King Ar·ta·xerxʹes, wine was set before him, and as usual I took up the wine and gave it to the king. But I had never been gloomy in his presence.
2 So the king said to me: “Why do you look so gloomy when you are not sick? This can be nothing but gloominess of heart.” At this I became very frightened.
3 Then I said to the king: “Long live the king! Why should I not look gloomy when the city, the place where my forefathers are buried, lies in ruins, and its gates have been consumed by fire?”
4 The king then said to me: “What is it that you are seeking?” At once I prayed to the God of the heavens.
5 I then said to the king: “If it pleases the king and if your servant has found favor with you, send me to Judah, to the city where my forefathers are buried, so that I may rebuild it.”
6 Then the king, with his royal consort sitting beside him, said to me: “How long will your journey be, and when will you return?” So it pleased the king to send me, and I gave him a set time.
7 Then I said to the king: “If it pleases the king, let letters be given me for the governors of the region Beyond the River, granting me safe passage until I reach Judah,
8 as well as a letter to Aʹsaph the keeper of the Royal Park, so that he may give me timber for beams for the gates of the Fortress of the House and for the walls of the city and for the house where I will go.” So the king gave them to me, for the good hand of my God was upon me.
9 Eventually I came to the governors of the region Beyond the River and gave them the king’s letters. The king also sent with me army chiefs and horsemen.
10 When San·balʹlat the Horʹo·nite and To·biʹah the Amʹmon·ite official heard about it, they were very displeased that someone had come to do something good for the people of Israel.
11 At length I came to Jerusalem, and I stayed there for three days.
12 I rose up by night, I and a few men with me, and I did not tell anyone what my God had put into my heart to do for Jerusalem, and there was no animal with me except the one I was riding.
13 And I went out at night through the Valley Gate, passing in front of the Fountain of the Big Snake to the Gate of the Ash Heaps, and I inspected the walls of Jerusalem that were broken down and its gates that had been consumed by fire.
14 And I passed along to the Fountain Gate and to the King’s Pool, and there was not enough space for the animal I was riding to pass.
15 But I continued up the valley by night, and I kept inspecting the wall, after which I came back and entered through the Valley Gate, and then I returned.
16 The deputy rulers did not know where I had gone and what I was doing, for I had not yet said anything to the Jews, the priests, the nobles, the deputy rulers, and the rest of the workers.
17 Finally I said to them: “You can see what a terrible situation we are in, how Jerusalem lies in ruins and its gates have been burned with fire. Come, let us rebuild the walls of Jerusalem, so that this disgrace will not continue.”
18 Then I told them of how the good hand of my God was upon me and also of the words that the king had spoken to me. At this they said: “Let us get up and build.” So they strengthened themselves for the good work.
19 Now when San·balʹlat the Horʹo·nite, To·biʹah the Amʹmon·ite official, and Geʹshem the Arabian heard of it, they began to mock us and show us their contempt and say: “What are you doing? Are you rebelling against the king?”
20 However, I replied: “The God of the heavens is the One who will grant us success, and we his servants will get up and build; but you have neither share nor claim nor memorial in Jerusalem.”
3 E·liʹa·shib the high priest and his brothers the priests got up to build the Sheep Gate. They sanctified it and set up its doors; they sanctified it as far as the Tower of Meʹah, as far as the Tower of Ha·nanʹel.
2 And next to them the men of Jerʹi·cho were building; and next to them Zacʹcur the son of Imʹri was building.
3 The sons of Has·se·naʹah built the Fish Gate; they timbered it and then set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars.
4 And next to them Merʹe·moth the son of U·riʹjah the son of Hakʹkoz did repair work, and next to them Me·shulʹlam the son of Ber·e·chiʹah the son of Me·shezʹa·bel did repair work, and next to them Zaʹdok the son of Baʹa·na did repair work.
5 And next to them the Te·koʹites did repair work, but their prominent men would not lower themselves to share in the service of their masters.
6 Joiʹa·da the son of Pa·seʹah and Me·shulʹlam the son of Bes·o·deiʹah repaired the Gate of the Old City; they timbered it and then set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars.
7 Next to them Mel·a·tiʹah the Gibʹe·on·ite and Jaʹdon the Me·ronʹo·thite did repair work, men of Gibʹe·on and Mizʹpah who were under the authority of the governor of the region Beyond the River.
8 Next to them Uzʹzi·el the son of Har·haiʹah, one of the goldsmiths, did repair work, and next to him Han·a·niʹah, one of the ointment mixers, did repair work; and they paved Jerusalem as far as the Broad Wall.
9 And next to them Re·phaʹiah the son of Hur, a prince of half the district of Jerusalem, did repair work.
10 And next to them Je·daʹiah the son of Ha·ruʹmaph did repair work in front of his own house, and next to him Hatʹtush the son of Hash·ab·neiʹah did repair work.
11 Mal·chiʹjah the son of Haʹrim and Hasʹshub the son of Paʹhath-moʹab repaired another section, as well as the Tower of the Ovens.
12 And next to them Shalʹlum the son of Hal·loʹhesh, a prince of half the district of Jerusalem, did repair work, along with his daughters.
13 Haʹnun and the inhabitants of Za·noʹah repaired the Valley Gate; they built it and then set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars, and they repaired 1,000 cubits of the wall as far as the Gate of the Ash Heaps.
14 Mal·chiʹjah the son of Reʹchab, a prince of the district of Beth-hac·cheʹrem, repaired the Gate of the Ash Heaps; he built it and set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars.
15 Shalʹlun the son of Col·hoʹzeh, a prince of the district of Mizʹpah, repaired the Fountain Gate; he built it and its roof, set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars, and also repaired the wall of the Pool of the Canal to the King’s Garden and as far as the Stairway that goes down from the City of David.
16 After him Ne·he·miʹah the son of Azʹbuk, a prince of half the district of Beth-zur, did repair work from in front of the Burial Places of David as far as the pool that had been built and as far as the House of the Mighty Ones.
17 After him the Levites did repair work: Reʹhum the son of Baʹni; and next to him Hash·a·biʹah, a prince of half the district of Keiʹlah, did repair work for his district.
18 After him their brothers did repair work: Bavʹvai the son of Henʹa·dad, a prince of half the district of Keiʹlah.
19 And next to him Eʹzer the son of Jeshʹu·a, a prince of Mizʹpah, was repairing another section in front of the ascent to the Armory at the Buttress.
20 After him Barʹuch the son of Zabʹbai worked with fervor and repaired another section, from the Buttress as far as the entrance of the house of E·liʹa·shib the high priest.
21 After him Merʹe·moth the son of U·riʹjah the son of Hakʹkoz repaired another section, from the entrance of the house of E·liʹa·shib as far as the end of E·liʹa·shib’s house.
22 And after him the priests, men of the district of the Jordan, did repair work.
23 After them Benjamin and Hasʹshub did repair work in front of their own house. After them Az·a·riʹah the son of Ma·a·seiʹah the son of A·na·niʹah did repair work near his own house.
24 After him Binʹnu·i the son of Henʹa·dad repaired another section, from the house of Az·a·riʹah as far as the Buttress and as far as the corner.
25 After him Paʹlal the son of Uʹzai did repair work in front of the Buttress and the tower that goes out from the King’s House, the upper one that belongs to the Courtyard of the Guard. After him there was Pe·daiʹah the son of Paʹrosh.
26 And the temple servants who lived in Oʹphel did repair work as far as in front of the Water Gate on the east and the protruding tower.
27 After them the Te·koʹites repaired another section, from in front of the great protruding tower as far as the wall of Oʹphel.
28 The priests did repair work above the Horse Gate, each in front of his own house.
29 After them Zaʹdok the son of Imʹmer did repair work in front of his own house. And after him She·maiʹah the son of Shec·a·niʹah, the keeper of the East Gate, did repair work.
30 After him Han·a·niʹah the son of Shel·e·miʹah and Haʹnun the sixth son of Zaʹlaph repaired another section. After him Me·shulʹlam the son of Ber·e·chiʹah did repair work in front of his own hall.
31 After him Mal·chiʹjah, a member of the goldsmith guild, did repair work as far as the house of the temple servants and the traders, in front of the Inspection Gate and as far as the roof chamber of the corner.
32 And between the roof chamber of the corner and the Sheep Gate, the goldsmiths and the traders did repair work.
4 Now as soon as San·balʹlat heard that we were rebuilding the wall, he became angry and very upset, and he kept mocking the Jews.
2 And in the presence of his brothers and the army of Sa·marʹi·a, he said: “What are the feeble Jews doing? Will they do this by themselves? Will they offer sacrifices? Will they finish up in a day? Will they bring the charred stones to life out of the heaps of dusty rubble?”
3 Now To·biʹah the Amʹmon·ite, who was standing beside him, said: “If even a fox would climb up on what they are building, it would knock down their stone wall.”
4 Hear, O our God, for we are being treated with contempt, and make their reproach return on their own heads, and give them over as plunder in a land of captivity.
5 And do not cover over their guilt or let their sin be erased from before you, for they have insulted the builders.
6 So we kept building the wall, and the entire wall was joined together and rebuilt up to half its height, and the people continued to put their heart into the work.
7 Now as soon as San·balʹlat, To·biʹah, the Arabians, the Amʹmon·ites, and the Ashʹdod·ites heard that the repairing of the walls of Jerusalem was progressing and that the gaps were being filled in, they became very angry.
8 They conspired together to come and fight against Jerusalem and to create a disturbance in it.
9 But we prayed to our God and kept a guard posted against them day and night.
10 However, people of Judah were saying: “The strength of the laborers has failed, and there is so much rubble; we will never be able to build the wall.”
11 And our enemies kept saying: “Before they know it or see us, we will come right in among them and kill them and stop the work.”
12 Whenever the Jews living near them came in, they told us again and again: “They will come at us from all directions.”
13 So I kept men posted at the lowest parts of the space behind the wall at the exposed places, and I posted them by families with their swords, their lances, and their bows.
14 When I saw their fear, I immediately rose and said to the nobles and the deputy rulers and the rest of the people: “Do not be afraid of them. Remember Jehovah, who is great and awe-inspiring; and fight for your brothers, your sons and daughters, your wives and homes.”
15 Now after our enemies heard that what they were doing had become known to us and that the true God had frustrated their plan, we all went back to work on the wall.
16 From that day forward, half of my men would do the work and half of them would hold the lances, the shields, the bows, and the coats of mail. And the princes stood behind the whole house of Judah
17 who were building the wall. Those who were carrying the loads did the work with one hand while holding a weapon in the other hand.
18 And each of the builders had a sword strapped to his hip while building, and the one to blow the horn stood beside me.
19 I then said to the nobles and the deputy rulers and the rest of the people: “The work is large and extensive, and we are spread out on the wall far apart from one another.
20 When you hear the sound of the horn, gather together to where we are. Our God will fight for us.”
21 So we kept working while the other half were holding the lances, from the break of dawn until the stars came out.
22 At that time I said to the people: “Let the men, each along with his attendant, spend the night inside Jerusalem, and they will guard us by night and work during the day.”
23 So neither I nor my brothers, my attendants, and the guards who followed me ever took off our garments, and each of us kept his weapon in his right hand.
8 All the people then gathered with one accord at the public square in front of the Water Gate, and they told Ezʹra the copyist to bring the book of the Law of Moses, which Jehovah had commanded Israel.
2 So Ezʹra the priest brought the Law before the congregation of men, women, and all who could listen with understanding, on the first day of the seventh month.
3 And he read aloud from it before the public square in front of the Water Gate, from daybreak until midday, to the men, the women, and all who could understand; and the people listened attentively to the book of the Law.
4 And Ezʹra the copyist was standing on a wooden podium made for the occasion; and standing alongside him on his right were Mat·ti·thiʹah, Sheʹma, A·naiʹah, U·riʹah, Hil·kiʹah, and Ma·a·seiʹah; and on his left were Pe·daiʹah, Mishʹa·el, Mal·chiʹjah, Haʹshum, Hash-badʹda·nah, Zech·a·riʹah, and Me·shulʹlam.
5 Ezʹra opened the book in the sight of all the people, for he was above all the people. As he opened it, all the people stood up.
6 Then Ezʹra praised Jehovah the true God, the great One, at which all the people answered, “Amen! Amen!” and lifted up their hands. They then bowed low and prostrated themselves to Jehovah with their faces to the ground.
7 And Jeshʹu·a, Baʹni, She·re·biʹah, Jaʹmin, Akʹkub, Shabʹbe·thai, Ho·diʹah, Ma·a·seiʹah, Ke·liʹta, Az·a·riʹah, Joʹza·bad, Haʹnan, and Pe·laʹiah, who were Levites, were explaining the Law to the people, while the people remained standing.
8 And they continued reading aloud from the book, from the Law of the true God, clearly explaining it and putting meaning into it; so they helped the people to understand what was being read.
9 And Ne·he·miʹah, who was then the governor, Ezʹra the priest and copyist, and the Levites who were instructing the people said to all the people: “This day is holy to Jehovah your God. Do not mourn or weep.” For all the people were weeping as they heard the words of the Law.
10 He said to them: “Go, eat the choice things and drink what is sweet, and send portions of food to those who have nothing prepared; for this day is holy to our Lord, and do not feel sad, for the joy of Jehovah is your stronghold.”
11 And the Levites were calming all the people, saying: “Be quiet! for this day is holy, and do not feel sad.”
12 So all the people went away to eat and to drink and to send out portions of food and to carry on a great rejoicing, for they understood the words that had been made known to them.
13 And on the second day, the heads of the paternal houses of all the people, the priests, and the Levites gathered around Ezʹra the copyist to gain further insight into the words of the Law.
14 Then they found written in the Law that Jehovah had commanded through Moses that the Israelites should dwell in booths during the festival in the seventh month,
15 and that they should make proclamation and announce throughout all their cities and throughout Jerusalem, saying: “Go out to the mountainous region and bring in leafy branches from olive trees, pine trees, myrtle and palm trees, and the leafy branches of other trees to make booths, according to what is written.”
16 So the people went out and brought them in to make booths for themselves, each one on his roof, as well as in their courtyards, in the courtyards of the house of the true God, in the public square of the Water Gate, and in the public square of the Gate of Eʹphra·im.
17 Thus all those of the congregation who had come back from the captivity made booths and were dwelling in the booths, for the Israelites had not done it this way from the days of Joshua the son of Nun until that day, so that there was very great rejoicing.
18 And day by day there was a reading from the book of the Law of the true God, from the first day until the last day. And they held the festival for seven days, and there was a solemn assembly on the eighth day, as was required.
10 Those who attested it by putting their seal to it were: Ne·he·miʹah the governor, the son of Hac·a·liʹah, And Zed·e·kiʹah,
2 Se·raiʹah, Az·a·riʹah, Jeremiah,
3 Pashʹhur, Am·a·riʹah, Mal·chiʹjah,
4 Hatʹtush, Sheb·a·niʹah, Malʹluch,
5 Haʹrim, Merʹe·moth, O·ba·diʹah,
6 Daniel, Ginʹne·thon, Barʹuch,
7 Me·shulʹlam, A·biʹjah, Mijʹa·min,
8 Ma·a·ziʹah, Bilʹgai, and She·maiʹah; these are the priests.
9 Also the Levites: Jeshʹu·a the son of Az·a·niʹah, Binʹnu·i of the sons of Henʹa·dad, Kadʹmi·el,
10 and their brothers Sheb·a·niʹah, Ho·diʹah, Ke·liʹta, Pe·laʹiah, Haʹnan,
11 Miʹca, Reʹhob, Hash·a·biʹah,
12 Zacʹcur, She·re·biʹah, Sheb·a·niʹah,
13 Ho·diʹah, Baʹni, and Be·niʹnu.
14 The heads of the people: Paʹrosh, Paʹhath-moʹab, Eʹlam, Zatʹtu, Baʹni,
15 Bunʹni, Azʹgad, Beʹbai,
16 Ad·o·niʹjah, Bigʹvai, Aʹdin,
17 Aʹter, Hez·e·kiʹah, Azʹzur,
18 Ho·diʹah, Haʹshum, Beʹzai,
19 Haʹriph, Anʹa·thoth, Neʹbai,
20 Magʹpi·ash, Me·shulʹlam, Heʹzir,
21 Me·shezʹa·bel, Zaʹdok, Jadʹdu·a,
22 Pel·a·tiʹah, Haʹnan, A·naiʹah,
23 Ho·sheʹa, Han·a·niʹah, Hasʹshub,
24 Hal·loʹhesh, Pilʹha, Shoʹbek,
25 Reʹhum, Ha·shabʹnah, Ma·a·seiʹah,
26 A·hiʹjah, Haʹnan, Aʹnan,
27 Malʹluch, Haʹrim, and Baʹa·nah.
28 The rest of the people—the priests, the Levites, the gatekeepers, the singers, the temple servants, and everyone who separated himself from the peoples of the lands to follow the Law of the true God, along with their wives, their sons, and their daughters, all those with knowledge and understanding—
29 joined their brothers, their prominent men, and bound themselves with a curse and an oath, to walk in the Law of the true God, which had been given through Moses the servant of the true God, and to observe carefully all the commandments of Jehovah our Lord, his judgments, and his regulations.
30 We will not give our daughters to the peoples of the land, and we will not take their daughters for our sons.
31 If the peoples of the land bring in their wares and every kind of grain to sell on the Sabbath day, we will not buy anything from them on the Sabbath or on a holy day. We will also forgo the produce of the seventh year and every outstanding debt.
32 Also, we imposed the obligation on ourselves for each of us to give a third of a shekel yearly for the service of the house of our God,
33 for the layer bread, the regular grain offering, the regular burnt offering of the Sabbaths and the new moons, and for the appointed feasts, for the holy things, for the sin offerings to make atonement for Israel, and for all the work of the house of our God.
34 Also, we cast lots concerning the supply of the wood that the priests, the Levites, and the people should bring to the house of our God by our paternal houses, at the appointed times, year by year, to burn on the altar of Jehovah our God, according to what is written in the Law.
35 We will also bring the first ripe fruits of our land and the first ripe fruits of every sort of fruit tree, year by year, to the house of Jehovah,
36 as well as the firstborn of our sons and of our livestock—according to what is written in the Law—and the firstborn of our herds and of our flocks. We will bring them to the house of our God, to the priests who minister at the house of our God.
37 Also, the firstfruits of our coarse meal, our contributions, the fruitage of every sort of tree, new wine, and oil, we should bring to the priests to the storerooms of the house of our God, along with the tenth from our land to the Levites, for the Levites are the ones who collect the tenths in all our agricultural cities.
38 And the priest, the son of Aaron, must be with the Levites when the Levites collect the tenth; and the Levites should offer up a tenth of the tenth to the house of our God, to the rooms of the storehouse.
39 For it is to the storerooms that the Israelites and the sons of the Levites should bring the contribution of the grain, the new wine, and the oil, and that is where the utensils of the sanctuary are, as well as the priests who minister, the gatekeepers, and the singers. We will not neglect the house of our God.
12 These were the priests and the Levites who went up with Ze·rubʹba·bel the son of She·alʹti·el, and Jeshʹu·a: Se·raiʹah, Jeremiah, Ezʹra,
2 Am·a·riʹah, Malʹluch, Hatʹtush,
3 Shec·a·niʹah, Reʹhum, Merʹe·moth,
4 Idʹdo, Ginʹne·thoi, A·biʹjah,
5 Mijʹa·min, Ma·a·diʹah, Bilʹgah,
6 She·maiʹah, Joiʹa·rib, Je·daʹiah,
7 Salʹlu, Aʹmok, Hil·kiʹah, and Je·daʹiah. These were the heads of the priests and their brothers in the days of Jeshʹu·a.
8 The Levites were Jeshʹu·a, Binʹnu·i, Kadʹmi·el, She·re·biʹah, Judah, and Mat·ta·niʹah, who led the songs of thanksgiving along with his brothers.
9 And Bak·bu·kiʹah and Unʹni their brothers stood opposite them for guard duties.
10 Jeshʹu·a became father to Joiʹa·kim, and Joiʹa·kim became father to E·liʹa·shib, and E·liʹa·shib to Joiʹa·da.
11 And Joiʹa·da became father to Jonʹa·than, and Jonʹa·than became father to Jadʹdu·a.
12 In the days of Joiʹa·kim, these were the priests, the heads of the paternal houses: for Se·raiʹah, Me·raiʹah; for Jeremiah, Han·a·niʹah;
13 for Ezʹra, Me·shulʹlam; for Am·a·riʹah, Je·ho·haʹnan;
14 for Malʹlu·chi, Jonʹa·than; for Sheb·a·niʹah, Joseph;
15 for Haʹrim, Adʹna; for Me·raʹioth, Helʹkai;
16 for Idʹdo, Zech·a·riʹah; for Ginʹne·thon, Me·shulʹlam;
17 for A·biʹjah, Zichʹri; for Mi·niʹa·min, . . .  ; for Mo·a·diʹah, Pilʹtai;
18 for Bilʹgah, Sham·muʹa; for She·maiʹah, Je·honʹa·than;
19 for Joiʹa·rib, Mat·teʹnai; for Je·daʹiah, Uzʹzi;
20 for Sal·laʹi, Kalʹlai; for Aʹmok, Eʹber;
21 for Hil·kiʹah, Hash·a·biʹah; for Je·daʹiah, Ne·thanʹel.
22 The heads of the paternal houses of the Levites in the days of E·liʹa·shib, Joiʹa·da, Jo·haʹnan, and Jadʹdu·a were recorded, as were the priests, down to the kingship of Da·riʹus the Persian.
23 The Levites who were heads of the paternal houses were recorded in the book of the history of the times, down to the days of Jo·haʹnan the son of E·liʹa·shib.
24 The heads of the Levites were Hash·a·biʹah, She·re·biʹah, and Jeshʹu·a the son of Kadʹmi·el, and their brothers stood opposite them to offer praise and give thanks according to the instructions of David the man of the true God, guard group corresponding to guard group.
25 Mat·ta·niʹah, Bak·bu·kiʹah, O·ba·diʹah, Me·shulʹlam, Talʹmon, and Akʹkub were standing guard as gatekeepers, guarding the storerooms by the gates.
26 These served in the days of Joiʹa·kim the son of Jeshʹu·a the son of Joʹza·dak and in the days of Ne·he·miʹah the governor and Ezʹra the priest and copyist.
27 At the inauguration of the walls of Jerusalem, they sought the Levites and brought them to Jerusalem from all the places they lived to celebrate the inauguration with rejoicing, with songs of thanksgiving, and with cymbals, stringed instruments, and harps.
28 And the sons of the singers gathered together from the district, from all around Jerusalem, from the settlements of the Ne·tophʹa·thites,
29 from Beth-gilʹgal, and from the fields of Geʹba and Azʹma·veth, for the singers had built settlements for themselves all around Jerusalem.
30 And the priests and the Levites purified themselves, and they purified the people, the gates, and the wall.
31 Then I brought the princes of Judah up on top of the wall. Further, I appointed two large thanksgiving choirs and processions, and the one walked to the right on the wall toward the Gate of the Ash Heaps.
32 Ho·shaiʹah and half of the princes of Judah walked behind them,
33 along with Az·a·riʹah, Ezʹra, Me·shulʹlam,
34 Judah, Benjamin, She·maiʹah, and Jeremiah.
35 With them were some of the sons of the priests with the trumpets: Zech·a·riʹah son of Jonʹa·than son of She·maiʹah son of Mat·ta·niʹah son of Mi·caiʹah son of Zacʹcur son of Aʹsaph,
36 and his brothers She·maiʹah, Azʹar·el, Milʹa·lai, Gilʹa·lai, Maʹai, Ne·thanʹel, Judah, and Ha·naʹni, with the musical instruments of David the man of the true God; and Ezʹra the copyist went before them.
37 At the Fountain Gate they went straight ahead up the Stairway of the City of David by the ascent of the wall above the House of David and on to the Water Gate to the east.
38 The other thanksgiving choir walked in the opposite direction, and I followed it with half of the people, on the wall up over the Tower of the Ovens and on to the Broad Wall
39 and up over the Gate of Eʹphra·im and on to the Gate of the Old City and on to the Fish Gate, the Tower of Ha·nanʹel, the Tower of Meʹah, and on to the Sheep Gate; and they came to a halt at the Gate of the Guard.
40 At length the two thanksgiving choirs stood before the house of the true God; so did I and half of the deputy rulers with me,
41 and the priests E·liʹa·kim, Ma·a·seiʹah, Mi·niʹa·min, Mi·caiʹah, Eli·o·eʹnai, Zech·a·riʹah, and Han·a·niʹah, with the trumpets,
42 and Ma·a·seiʹah, She·maiʹah, El·e·aʹzar, Uzʹzi, Je·ho·haʹnan, Mal·chiʹjah, Eʹlam, and Eʹzer. And the singers sang loudly under the oversight of Iz·ra·hiʹah.
43 On that day they offered great sacrifices and rejoiced, for the true God made them rejoice with great joy. The women and the children also rejoiced, so that the rejoicing of Jerusalem could be heard far away.
44 On that day men were appointed over the storehouses for the contributions, the firstfruits, and the tenths. Into them they were to gather from the fields of the cities the portions required by the Law for the priests and the Levites, for there was rejoicing in Judah because of the priests and the Levites who were ministering.
45 And they began taking care of the duties of their God and the obligation of the purification, as did the singers and the gatekeepers, according to the instructions of David and his son Solʹo·mon.
46 For long ago in the days of David and Aʹsaph, there were directors for the singers and for the songs of praise and thanksgiving to God.
47 And during the days of Ze·rubʹba·bel and during the days of Ne·he·miʹah, all Israel gave portions to the singers and the gatekeepers, according to the daily need. They also set aside the portion for the Levites, and the Levites set aside the portion for the descendants of Aaron.
13 On that day the book of Moses was read in the hearing of the people, and it was found written that no Amʹmon·ite or Moʹab·ite should ever enter the congregation of the true God,
2 for they had not met the Israelites with bread and water, but instead they had hired Baʹlaam against them to curse them. However, our God had changed the curse into a blessing.
3 As soon as they heard the Law, they began to separate from Israel all those of foreign descent.
4 Now before this, the priest in charge of the storerooms of the house of our God was E·liʹa·shib, a relative of To·biʹah.
5 He had made available for him a large storeroom, where previously they used to put the grain offering, the frankincense, and the utensils and the tenth of the grain, the new wine, and the oil, to which the Levites, the singers, and the gatekeepers are entitled, along with the contribution for the priests.
6 And during all this time I was not in Jerusalem, for I went to the king in the 32nd year of King Ar·ta·xerxʹes of Babylon; and sometime later I asked the king for a leave of absence.
7 Then I came to Jerusalem and noticed the terrible thing that E·liʹa·shib had done in behalf of To·biʹah, making a storeroom available for him in the courtyard of the house of the true God.
8 This was very displeasing to me, so I threw all of To·biʹah’s household furniture out of the storeroom.
9 After that I gave orders, and they cleansed the storerooms; and I put back there the utensils of the house of the true God, with the grain offering and the frankincense.
10 I also found out that the portions of the Levites had not been given them, so that the Levites and the singers who did the work had gone off, each to his own field.
11 So I reprimanded the deputy rulers and said: “Why has the house of the true God been neglected?” Then I gathered them together and assigned them back to their posts.
12 And all Judah brought in the tenth of the grain, the new wine, and the oil to the storerooms.
13 Then I put Shel·e·miʹah the priest, Zaʹdok the copyist, and Pe·daiʹah of the Levites in charge of the storerooms, and Haʹnan the son of Zacʹcur the son of Mat·ta·niʹah was their assistant, for these men were considered reliable. It was their responsibility to make the distribution to their brothers.
14 Do remember me, O my God, concerning this, and do not wipe out my acts of loyal love that I have done for the house of my God and its services.
15 In those days I saw people in Judah treading winepresses on the Sabbath, bringing in heaps of grain and loading them on donkeys, and bringing wine, grapes, figs, and every sort of load into Jerusalem on the Sabbath day. So I warned them against selling provisions on that day.
16 And the Tyrʹi·ans who lived in the city were bringing in fish and all kinds of merchandise, selling them to the people of Judah and in Jerusalem on the Sabbath.
17 So I reprimanded the nobles of Judah and said to them: “What is this evil thing that you are doing, even profaning the Sabbath day?
18 Was not this what your forefathers did, so that our God brought all this disaster on us and also on this city? Now you are adding to the burning anger against Israel by profaning the Sabbath.”
19 So as soon as the shadows began to fall on the gates of Jerusalem before the Sabbath, I ordered that the doors be closed. I also said that they should not open them until after the Sabbath, and I stationed some of my own attendants at the gates so that no loads would be brought in on the Sabbath day.
20 So the traders and the sellers of all kinds of merchandise spent the night outside Jerusalem once or twice.
21 Then I warned them and said to them: “Why are you spending the night in front of the wall? If you do it again, I will use force against you.” From that time on they did not come on the Sabbath.
22 And I told the Levites that they should regularly purify themselves and come and guard the gates to keep the Sabbath day holy. This, also, do remember to my credit, O my God, and show me pity according to your abundant loyal love.
23 In those days I also saw Jews who had married Ashʹdod·ite, Amʹmon·ite, and Moʹab·ite women.
24 Half of their sons were speaking Ashʹdod·ite and the language of the different peoples, but none of them knew how to speak the language of the Jews.
25 So I reprimanded them and called down a curse on them and struck some of the men and pulled out their hair and made them swear by God: “You should not give your daughters to their sons, and you should not accept any of their daughters for your sons or yourselves.
26 Was it not because of these that King Solʹo·mon of Israel sinned? Among the many nations there was no king like him; and he was loved by his God, so that God made him king over all Israel. But the foreign wives caused even him to sin.
27 Is it not something unheard of for you to commit this great evil in acting unfaithfully against our God by marrying foreign women?”
28 One of the sons of Joiʹa·da the son of E·liʹa·shib the high priest had become a son-in-law of San·balʹlat the Horʹo·nite. So I drove him away from me.
29 Do remember them, O my God, because they have defiled the priesthood and the covenant of the priesthood and the Levites.
30 And I purified them from every foreign defilement, and I assigned duties to the priests and to the Levites, each to his own service,
31 and arranged for the supply of the wood at appointed times and for the first ripe fruits. Do remember me favorably, O my God.
2 After these things, when the rage of King A·has·u·eʹrus had subsided, he remembered what Vashʹti had done and what had been decided against her.
2 Then the king’s personal attendants said: “A search should be made for young, beautiful virgins for the king.
3 And let the king appoint commissioners in all the provinces of his realm to bring together all the beautiful young virgins to Shuʹshan the citadel, to the house of the women. Let them be put in the care of Hegʹa·i the king’s eunuch and guardian of the women, and let them be given beauty treatments.
4 And the young woman who is most pleasing to the king will be queen instead of Vashʹti.” The suggestion was pleasing to the king, and that is what he did.
5 There was a certain Jewish man in Shuʹshan the citadel whose name was Morʹde·cai son of Jaʹir son of Shimʹe·i son of Kish, a Benʹja·min·ite,
6 who had been taken into exile from Jerusalem with the people who were deported with King Jec·o·niʹah of Judah, whom King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon took into exile.
7 He was the guardian of Ha·dasʹsah, that is, Esther, the daughter of his father’s brother, for she had neither father nor mother. The young woman was beautifully formed and attractive in appearance, and at the death of her father and her mother, Morʹde·cai took her as his daughter.
8 When the king’s word and his law were proclaimed and when many young women were brought together at Shuʹshan the citadel under the care of Hegʹa·i, Esther was also taken to the king’s house under the care of Hegʹa·i the guardian of the women.
9 Now the young woman was pleasing to him and won his favor, so he promptly arranged for her beauty treatments and her diet, and he assigned to her seven selected young women from the king’s house. He also transferred her and her young attendants to the best place in the house of the women.
10 Esther did not say anything about her people or her relatives, for Morʹde·cai had instructed her not to tell anyone.
11 Day after day Morʹde·cai would walk in front of the courtyard of the house of the women to learn about Esther’s welfare and about what was happening to her.
12 Each young woman had her turn to go in to King A·has·u·eʹrus after completing the 12-month treatment that was prescribed for the women, for this was the way they had to fulfill their beauty treatment—six months with oil of myrrh and six months with balsam oil and various ointments for beauty treatment.
13 Then the young woman was ready to go in to the king, and whatever she asked for would be given her when she went from the house of the women to the king’s house.
14 In the evening she would go in, and in the morning she would return to the second house of the women, under the care of Sha·ashʹgaz the king’s eunuch, the guardian of the concubines. She would not go to the king again unless the king had been especially pleased with her and she was requested by name.
15 And when the turn came for Esther the daughter of Abʹi·ha·il the uncle of Morʹde·cai, who had taken her as his daughter, to go in to the king, she did not request anything except what Hegʹa·i the king’s eunuch, the guardian of the women, recommended. (All the while Esther was winning the favor of everyone who saw her.)
16 Esther was taken to King A·has·u·eʹrus at his royal house in the tenth month, that is, the month of Teʹbeth, in the seventh year of his reign.
17 And the king came to love Esther more than all the other women, and she won his favor and approval more than any of the other virgins. So he put the royal headdress on her head and made her queen instead of Vashʹti.
18 And the king held a great banquet for all his princes and his servants, the banquet of Esther. He then proclaimed an amnesty for the provinces, and he kept giving gifts according to the means of the king.
19 Now when virgins were brought together a second time, Morʹde·cai was sitting in the king’s gate.
20 Esther did not say anything about her relatives and her people, just as Morʹde·cai had instructed her; Esther continued to do what Morʹde·cai said, just as when she was under his care.
21 In those days while Morʹde·cai was sitting in the king’s gate, Bigʹthan and Teʹresh, two court officials of the king, doorkeepers, got angry and plotted to do away with King A·has·u·eʹrus.
22 But Morʹde·cai learned about it, and he immediately told Queen Esther. Esther then spoke to the king in Morʹde·cai’s name.
23 So the matter was investigated and eventually confirmed, and both men were hanged on a stake; and this was all recorded in the book of the history of the times in the presence of the king.
3 After this King A·has·u·eʹrus promoted Haʹman the son of Ham·me·daʹtha the Agʹag·ite and exalted him by putting his throne above all the other princes who were with him.
2 And all the king’s servants who were in the king’s gate would bow low and prostrate themselves to Haʹman, for this is what the king had commanded respecting him. But Morʹde·cai refused to bow low or prostrate himself.
3 So the king’s servants who were in the king’s gate said to Morʹde·cai: “Why are you ignoring the king’s commandment?”
4 Day after day they would ask him, but he would not listen to them. Then they told Haʹman to see whether Morʹde·cai’s conduct would be tolerated; for he had told them that he was a Jew.
5 Now when Haʹman saw that Morʹde·cai refused to bow low and prostrate himself to him, Haʹman became filled with rage.
6 But he despised the thought of doing away with Morʹde·cai alone, for they had told him about Morʹde·cai’s people. So Haʹman began seeking to annihilate all the Jews who were in the entire realm of A·has·u·eʹrus, all of Morʹde·cai’s people.
7 In the first month, that is, the month of Niʹsan, in the 12th year of King A·has·u·eʹrus, they cast Pur (that is, the Lot) before Haʹman to determine the day and the month, and it fell on the 12th month, that is, Aʹdar.
8 Haʹman then said to King A·has·u·eʹrus: “There is a certain people scattered and dispersed among the peoples in all the provinces of your realm, whose laws are different from those of all other peoples; and they do not obey the king’s laws, and it is not in the king’s interests to let them be.
9 If it pleases the king, let a decree be written that they be destroyed. I will pay 10,000 silver talents to the officials to put into the royal treasury.”
10 At that the king removed his signet ring from his own hand and gave it to Haʹman the son of Ham·me·daʹtha the Agʹag·ite, who was the enemy of the Jews.
11 The king said to Haʹman: “The silver and the people are given to you, to do with them as you see fit.”
12 The king’s secretaries were then called on the 13th day of the first month. They put in writing all of Haʹman’s orders to the king’s satraps, the governors who were over the provinces, and the princes of the different peoples, to each province in its own script and to each people in its own language. It was written in the name of King A·has·u·eʹrus and sealed with the king’s signet ring.
13 The letters were sent by means of couriers to all the king’s provinces, giving the order to annihilate, to kill, and to destroy all the Jews, young and old alike, children and women, on a single day, on the 13th day of the 12th month, that is, the month of Aʹdar, and to seize their possessions.
14 A copy of the document was to be issued as a law in every province and proclaimed to all the peoples, so that they would be prepared for that day.
15 The couriers went out quickly by order of the king; the law was issued in Shuʹshan the citadel. The king and Haʹman then sat down to drink, but the city of Shuʹshan was in confusion.
6 That night the king could not sleep. So he said to bring the book of the historical records of the times, and it was read to the king.
2 There it was found written what Morʹde·cai had reported concerning Big·thaʹna and Teʹresh, two court officials of the king, doorkeepers, who had plotted to do away with King A·has·u·eʹrus.
3 The king asked: “What honor and recognition has been given to Morʹde·cai for this?” To this the king’s personal attendants said: “Nothing has been done for him.”
4 Later the king said: “Who is in the courtyard?” Now Haʹman had come into the outer courtyard of the king’s house to speak to the king about having Morʹde·cai hanged on the stake that he had prepared for him.
5 The king’s attendants said to him: “It is Haʹman standing in the courtyard.” So the king said: “Have him come in.”
6 When Haʹman came in, the king said to him: “What should be done for the man whom the king wishes to honor?” Haʹman said in his heart: “Whom would the king wish to honor more than me?”
7 So Haʹman said to the king: “For the man whom the king wishes to honor,
8 let them bring royal attire that the king wears and a horse on which the king rides, with the royal headdress on its head.
9 Then let the attire and the horse be put into the charge of one of the king’s noble princes, and they should clothe the man whom the king wishes to honor and have him ride on the horse in the public square of the city. They should call out before him: ‘This is what is done for the man whom the king wishes to honor!’”
10 At once the king said to Haʹman: “Quick! Take the attire and the horse, and do what you just said for Morʹde·cai the Jew who is sitting in the king’s gate. Do not leave out anything that you have said.”
11 So Haʹman took the attire and the horse, and he clothed Morʹde·cai and made him ride in the public square of the city and called out before him: “This is what is done for the man whom the king wishes to honor!”
12 Afterward Morʹde·cai returned to the king’s gate, but Haʹman hurried to his house, mourning with his head covered.
13 When Haʹman related to his wife Zeʹresh and to all his friends everything that had happened to him, his wise men and his wife Zeʹresh said to him: “If Morʹde·cai, before whom you have started to fall, is of Jewish descent, you will not prevail against him; you will surely fall before him.”
14 While they were still speaking with him, the king’s court officials arrived and quickly took Haʹman to the banquet that Esther had made.
10 King A·has·u·eʹrus imposed forced labor on the land and the islands of the sea.
2 And all his powerful and mighty accomplishments, as well as the detailed account of Morʹde·cai’s greatness to which the king exalted him, are they not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Meʹdi·a and Persia?
3 For Morʹde·cai the Jew was second only to King A·has·u·eʹrus. He was great among the Jews and respected by the multitude of his brothers, working for the good of his people and advocating the welfare of all their descendants.
2 Afterward the day came when the sons of the true God entered to take their station before Jehovah, and Satan also entered among them to take his station before Jehovah.
2 Then Jehovah said to Satan: “Where have you come from?” Satan answered Jehovah: “From roving about on the earth and from walking about in it.”
3 And Jehovah said to Satan: “Have you taken note of my servant Job? There is no one like him on the earth. He is an upright man of integrity, fearing God and shunning what is bad. He is still holding firmly to his integrity, even though you try to incite me against him to destroy him for no reason.”
4 But Satan answered Jehovah: “Skin for skin. A man will give everything that he has for his life.
5 But, for a change, stretch out your hand and strike his bone and flesh, and he will surely curse you to your very face.”
6 Then Jehovah said to Satan: “Look! He is in your hand! Only do not take his life!”
7 So Satan went out from the presence of Jehovah and struck Job with painful boils from the sole of his foot to the crown of his head.
8 And Job took a piece of broken pottery to scrape himself, and he was sitting among the ashes.
9 Finally his wife said to him: “Are you still holding firmly to your integrity? Curse God and die!”
10 But he said to her: “You are talking like one of the senseless women. Should we accept only what is good from the true God and not accept also what is bad?” In all of this, Job did not sin with his lips.
11 Three companions of Job heard about all the calamities that had come upon him, and each came from his own place—Elʹi·phaz the Teʹman·ite, Bilʹdad the Shuʹhite, and Zoʹphar the Naʹa·ma·thite. So they agreed to meet together to go and sympathize with Job and comfort him.
12 When they saw him from a distance, they did not recognize him. They began to weep loudly and to rip their garments apart, and they threw dust into the air and onto their heads.
13 Then they sat on the ground with him for seven days and seven nights. No one said a word to him, for they saw that his pain was very great.
3 It was after this that Job began to speak and to curse the day of his birth.
2 Job said:
3 “Let the day perish on which I was born, Also the night when someone said: ‘A man has been conceived!’
4 Let that day be darkness. Let God above show no concern for it; Let no light shine upon it.
5 Let the deepest darkness reclaim it. Let a rain cloud settle over it. Let whatever darkens the day terrify it.
6 That night—let the gloom seize it; Let it not rejoice among the days of a year, And let it not enter among the number of the months.
7 Indeed! Let that night become barren; Let no joyful cry be heard in it.
8 Let those who curse the day put a curse on it, Those who are able to awaken Le·viʹa·than.
9 Let the stars of its twilight grow dark; Let it wait in vain for daylight, And let it not see the rays of dawn.
10 For it did not close the doors of my mother’s womb; Nor did it hide trouble from my eyes.
11 Why did I not die at birth? Why did I not perish when I came from the womb?
12 Why were there knees to receive me And breasts to nurse me?
13 For now I would be lying down undisturbed; I would be sleeping and at rest
14 With kings of the earth and their advisers, Who built for themselves places that are now in ruins,
15 Or with princes who possessed gold, Whose houses were filled with silver.
16 Or why was I not like a hidden miscarriage, Like children who have never seen the light?
17 There even the wicked have ceased from agitation; There the weary are at rest.
18 There the prisoners are at ease together; They do not hear the voice of the one forcing them to work.
19 Small and great are the same there, And the slave is set free from his master.
20 Why does he give light to one who is suffering And life to those in bitter distress?
21 Why do they long for death, but it does not come? They dig for it more than for hidden treasures,
22 Those who are rejoicing greatly, Who are happy when they find the grave.
23 Why does he give light to a man who has lost his way, Whom God has hedged in?
24 For in place of my food comes my sighing, And my groaning pours out like water.
25 For what I have dreaded has come upon me, And what I have feared has befallen me.
26 I have had no peace, no quiet, no rest, But trouble keeps coming.”
4 Elʹi·phaz the Teʹman·ite then said in reply:
2 “If someone tries to speak to you, will you become impatient? For who can hold back from speaking?
3 True, you have corrected many, And you used to strengthen the weak hands.
4 Your words would raise up anyone stumbling, And you would strengthen those whose knees were buckling.
5 But now it has happened to you, and you are overwhelmed; It touches you, and you are dismayed.
6 Does your reverence for God not give you confidence? Does your way of integrity not give you hope?
7 Remember, please: What innocent person has ever perished? When have the upright ever been destroyed?
8 What I have seen is that those who plow what is harmful And those who sow trouble will reap the same.
9 By the breath of God they perish, And through a blast of his anger they come to an end.
10 The lion roars, and a young lion growls, But even the teeth of strong lions are broken.
11 A lion perishes for lack of prey, And the cubs of a lion are scattered.
12 Now a word was brought to me in secret, And a whisper of it reached my ear.
13 In troubling thoughts during visions of the night, When deep sleep falls upon men,
14 A terrible trembling came upon me, Filling all my bones with dread.
15 A spirit passed over my face; The hair of my flesh bristled.
16 It then stood still, But I did not recognize its appearance. A form was in front of my eyes; There was a calm, and then I heard a voice:
17 ‘Can a mortal man be more righteous than God? Can a man be cleaner than his own Maker?’
18 Look! He has no faith in his servants, And he finds fault with his angels.
19 How much more so with those dwelling in houses of clay, Whose foundation is in the dust, Who are crushed as easily as a moth!
20 They are completely crushed from morning to evening; They perish forever, and no one takes notice.
21 Are they not like a tent whose cord is pulled out? They die without wisdom.
5 “Call, please! Is there anyone answering you? To which of the holy ones will you turn?
2 For resentment will kill the foolish one, And envy will put the simpleminded to death.
3 I have seen the foolish one taking root, But suddenly his dwelling place is cursed.
4 His sons are far from safety, And they are crushed at the city gate, with no one to save them.
5 The hungry one eats what he harvests, Taking it even from among the thorns, And their possessions are ensnared.
6 For harmful things do not sprout from the dust, And trouble does not spring from the ground.
7 For man is born for trouble, As surely as sparks fly upward.
8 But I would appeal to God, And to God I would submit my case,
9 To the One doing great and unsearchable things, Wonderful things without number.
10 He gives rain to the earth And sends waters upon the fields.
11 He raises the lowly up high, And he raises up the dejected one to salvation.
12 He frustrates the schemes of the crafty, So that the work of their hands does not succeed.
13 He catches the wise in their own cunning, So that the plans of the shrewd are thwarted.
14 They meet with darkness during the day, And they grope about at midday as if it were night.
15 He saves from the sword of their mouth, Saving the poor from the hand of the strong,
16 So that there is hope for the lowly, But the mouth of unrighteousness is shut.
17 Look! Happy is the man whom God reproves; So do not reject the discipline of the Almighty!
18 For he causes pain, but binds up the wound; He breaks apart, but heals with his own hands.
19 He will save you from six calamities, Even the seventh will not harm you.
20 During famine he will redeem you from death, And from the power of a sword during war.
21 You will be protected from the lash of the tongue, And you will not fear devastation when it comes.
22 You will laugh at destruction and hunger, And you will not fear the wild beasts of the earth.
23 For the stones of the field will not harm you, And the wild beasts of the field will be at peace with you.
24 You will know that your tent is secure, And nothing will be missing when you inspect your pasture.
25 You will enjoy many children, And your descendants will be as plentiful as the vegetation of the earth.
26 You will still be strong when you go to the grave, Like sheaves of grain gathered in their season.
27 Look! We have investigated this, and it is so. Listen and accept it.”
6 Job then said in reply:
2 “If only my anguish could be fully weighed And put on scales together with my calamity!
3 For now it is heavier than the sands of the seas. That is why my words have been wild talk.
4 For the arrows of the Almighty have pierced me, And my spirit is drinking their venom; The terrors from God are lined up against me.
5 Will a wild donkey cry out when it has grass, Or will a bull bellow when it has fodder?
6 Is tasteless food eaten without salt, Or is there flavor in the juice of a mallow?
7 I have refused to touch such things. They are like contamination in my food.
8 O that my request would be realized And that God would grant my desire!
9 That God would be willing to crush me, And that he would reach out his hand and do away with me!
10 For even that would bring me comfort; I would leap for joy despite the unrelenting pain, For I have not denied the sayings of the Holy One.
11 Do I have the strength to keep waiting? And what end awaits me, that I should continue to live?
12 Is my strength like that of rock? Or is my flesh made of copper?
13 Is there any way that I can help myself When all my means of support has been driven from me?
14 Anyone who withholds loyal love from his fellow man Will forsake the fear of the Almighty.
15 My own brothers have been as treacherous as a winter stream, Like the water of winter streams that dry up.
16 They are darkened by ice, And in them the melting snow is hidden.
17 But in due season they become waterless and come to an end; When it becomes hot, they dry up.
18 Their course is diverted; They flow into the desert and vanish.
19 The caravans of Teʹma look for them; The travelers from Sheʹba wait for them.
20 They are ashamed because of their misplaced trust; They come there only to be disappointed.
21 For this is how you have become to me; You have seen the terror of my calamity, and you are afraid.
22 Have I said, ‘Give me something,’ Or requested that you make a gift for me from your wealth?
23 Have I asked to be rescued from the hand of an enemy Or to be saved from oppressors?
24 Instruct me, and I will be silent; Help me to understand my mistake.
25 Honest words are not painful! But what benefit can be found in your reproof?
26 Are you scheming to reprove my words, A desperate man’s sayings, which the wind blows away?
27 You would also cast lots over an orphan And sell your own friend!
28 So now turn and look at me, For I would not lie to your very faces.
29 Reconsider, please—do not misjudge me— Yes, reconsider, for my righteousness is yet intact.
30 Is my tongue speaking unjustly? Does my palate not discern that something is wrong?
7 “Is not the life of mortal man on earth like compulsory labor, And are not his days like those of a hired worker?
2 Like a slave, he longs for the shadow, And like a hired worker, he waits for his wages.
3 Thus I have been assigned months of futility And nights of misery have been counted out for me.
4 When I lie down I ask, ‘When will I get up?’ But as the night drags on, I toss restlessly until the dawning of the day.
5 My flesh is covered with maggots and clods of dirt; My skin is full of scabs and pus.
6 My days go by more quickly than a weaver’s shuttle, And they come to an end without hope.
7 Remember that my life is wind, That my eye will never again see happiness.
8 The eye that sees me now will see me no more; Your eyes will look for me, but I will be gone.
9 Like a cloud that fades and vanishes, The one who goes down to the Grave does not come back up.
10 He will not return again to his house, And his place will acknowledge him no more.
11 Therefore, I will not restrain my mouth. I will speak in the anguish of my spirit; I will complain in my bitter distress!
12 Am I the sea or a sea monster, That you should set a guard over me?
13 When I say, ‘My couch will comfort me; My bed will help ease my misery,’
14 Then you terrify me with dreams And frighten me with visions,
15 So that I would choose suffocation, Yes, death rather than this body of mine.
16 I loathe my life; I do not want to go on living. Leave me alone, for my days are like a breath.
17 What is mortal man that you should concern yourself with him And fix your attention on him?
18 Why do you inspect him every morning And test him every moment?
19 Will you not look away from me And leave me alone long enough to swallow my saliva?
20 If I have sinned, how could I harm you, the Observer of mankind? Why have you made me your target? Have I become a burden to you?
21 Why do you not pardon my transgression And excuse my error? For soon I will lie down in the dust, And you will look for me, but I will be gone.”
8 Bilʹdad the Shuʹhite then said in reply:
2 “How long will you keep speaking like this? The words of your mouth are but a mighty wind!
3 Will God pervert justice, Or will the Almighty pervert righteousness?
4 If your sons sinned against him, He let them be punished for their revolt;
5 But if you would just look to God And plead with the Almighty for favor,
6 And if you were truly pure and upright, He would pay attention to you And restore you to your rightful place.
7 And though your beginning was small, Your future would be great.
8 Ask, please, the former generation, And pay attention to the things their fathers found out.
9 For we were born only yesterday, and we know nothing, Because our days on earth are a shadow.
10 Will they not instruct you And tell you what they know?
11 Will a papyrus plant grow tall where there is no marsh? Will a reed grow tall without water?
12 While it is still in the bud, not yet plucked off, It will dry up before any other plant.
13 This is the outcome of all who forget God, For the hope of the godless will perish,
14 Whose confidence is in vain And whose trust is as fragile as a spider’s web.
15 He will lean against his house, but it will not keep standing; He will try to hold on to it, but it will not last.
16 He is a moist plant in the sunlight, And his shoots spread out in the garden.
17 In a heap of stones, his roots become entwined; He looks for a house among the stones.
18 But when he is uprooted from his place, That place will deny him and say, ‘I have never seen you.’
19 Yes, that is how he will disappear; Then others will spring up from the dust.
20 Surely God will not reject those who keep integrity; Nor will he support evil men,
21 For he will yet fill your mouth with laughter And your lips with shouts of joy.
22 Those hating you will be clothed with shame, And the tent of wicked ones will be no more.”
9 Job said in reply:
2 “For a fact I know that this is so. But how can mortal man be in the right in a case with God?
3 If someone wishes to argue with Him, That one could not answer one of His questions in a thousand.
4 He is wise in heart and mighty in power. Who can resist him and come off uninjured?
5 He moves mountains without anyone knowing it; He overturns them in his anger.
6 He shakes the earth out of its place, So that its pillars tremble.
7 He commands the sun not to shine And seals off the light of the stars;
8 He spreads out the heavens by himself, And he treads upon the high waves of the sea.
9 He made the Ash, the Keʹsil, and the Kiʹmah constellations, And the constellations of the southern sky;
10 He does great and unsearchable things, Wonderful things that cannot be counted.
11 He passes by me, and I cannot see him; He moves past me, but I do not discern him.
12 When he snatches something, who can resist him? Who can say to him, ‘What are you doing?’
13 God will not restrain his anger; Even the helpers of Raʹhab will bow down to him.
14 How much more when I answer him Must I choose my words carefully to argue with him!
15 Even if I were in the right, I would not answer him. I could only plead for mercy from my judge.
16 If I call out to him, will he answer me? I do not believe that he will listen to my voice,
17 For he crushes me with a storm And multiplies my wounds for no reason.
18 He does not let me catch my breath; He keeps filling me with bitter things.
19 If it is a matter of power, he is the strong one. If it is a matter of justice, he says: ‘Who can call me to account?’
20 If I were in the right, my own mouth would condemn me; Even if I keep my integrity, he will declare me guilty.
21 Even if I keep my integrity, I am not confident about myself; I reject this life of mine.
22 It is all the same. That is why I say, ‘He destroys the innocent and the wicked alike.’
23 If a flash flood should cause sudden death, He would mock at the despair of the innocent.
24 The earth has been handed over to the wicked; He covers the eyes of its judges. If it is not he, then, who is it?
25 Now my days are swifter than a runner; They run away without seeing good.
26 They glide by like reed boats, Like eagles that swoop down on their prey.
27 If I say, ‘I will forget my complaint, I will change my expression and be cheerful,’
28 I would still be afraid because of all my pains, And I know you would not find me innocent.
29 I would be found guilty. So why should I struggle in vain?
30 If I wash myself in water from melting snow, And I cleanse my hands in lye,
31 Then you would dip me in a pit, So that even my own garments would detest me.
32 For he is not a man like me that I may answer him, That we should go to court together.
33 There is no person to decide between us, Who could serve as our judge.
34 If he would stop beating me And not let his terror frighten me,
35 Then I would speak to him unafraid, For it is not in me to speak out of fear.
10 “I loathe my life. I will give vent to my complaints. I will speak out in my bitter distress!
2 I will say to God: ‘Do not pronounce me guilty. Tell me why you are contending with me.
3 Does it benefit you to oppress, To despise the work of your hands While you favor the advice of the wicked?
4 Do you have eyes of flesh, Or do you see as mortal man does?
5 Are your days like the days of mortals, Or are your years like those of a man,
6 That you should search out my error And keep looking for my sin?
7 You know that I am not guilty; And no one can save me from your hand.
8 Your own hands have shaped me and made me, But now you would completely destroy me.
9 Remember, please, that you made me out of clay, But now you make me return to dust.
10 Did you not pour me out like milk And curdle me like cheese?
11 With skin and flesh you clothed me, And with bones and sinews you wove me together.
12 You have given me life and loyal love; You have guarded my spirit with your care.
13 But you secretly intended to do these things. I know that these things are from you.
14 If I sinned, you would watch me, And you would not acquit me of my error.
15 If I am guilty, too bad for me! And even if I am innocent, I cannot raise my head, For I am filled with dishonor and affliction.
16 If I raise my head up, you hunt for me like a lion And again show your power against me.
17 You bring new witnesses against me And increase your anger against me, As hardship after hardship comes upon me.
18 So why did you bring me out from the womb? I should have died before any eye could see me.
19 It would have been as though I never existed; I would have been taken straight from the womb to the grave.’
20 Are not my days few? Let him leave me alone; Let him turn his eyes away from me, so that I may find some relief
21 Before I go away—and I will not return— To the land of deepest darkness,
22 To the land of utter gloom, A land of deep shadow and disorder, Where even the light is like the gloom.”
11 Zoʹphar the Naʹa·ma·thite said in reply:
2 “Will all these words go unanswered, Or will a lot of talking make someone right?
3 Will your empty talk silence people? Will no one rebuke you for your mocking words?
4 For you say, ‘My teaching is pure, And I am clean in your eyes.’
5 But if only God would speak And open his lips to you!
6 Then he would reveal to you the secrets of wisdom, For practical wisdom has many sides. Then you would realize that God allows some of your error to be forgotten.
7 Can you discover the deep things of God Or discover everything about the Almighty?
8 It is higher than heaven. What can you accomplish? It is deeper than the Grave. What can you know?
9 It is longer than the earth And broader than the sea.
10 If he passes by and detains someone and convenes a court, Who can resist him?
11 For he knows when men are deceitful. When he sees what is evil, will he not take notice?
12 But an empty-headed man will understand Only when a wild donkey can give birth to a man.
13 If only you would prepare your heart And stretch out your hands to him.
14 If your hand is doing wrong, put it far away, And let no unrighteousness dwell in your tents.
15 For then you could lift up your face with no defect; You could stand firm, free of fear.
16 For then you will forget your trouble; You will remember it as waters that have flowed past you.
17 Your life will become brighter than midday; Even its darkness will be like the morning.
18 You will be confident because there is hope, And you will look around and lie down in security.
19 You will lie down, with no one to make you afraid, And many people will seek your favor.
20 But the eyes of the wicked will fail; And they will find no place to escape, And their only hope will be death.”
12 Then Job said in reply:
2 “Surely you are the people who know, And wisdom will die out with you!
3 But I too have understanding. I am not inferior to you. Who does not know these things?
4 I have become a laughingstock to my companions, One calling to God for an answer. A righteous and blameless man is a laughingstock.
5 The carefree person has contempt for calamity, Thinking it is only for those whose feet are unsteady.
6 The tents of robbers are at peace, And those who provoke God are secure, Those who have their god in their hands.
7 However, ask, please, the animals, and they will instruct you; Also the birds of the heavens, and they will tell you.
8 Or give consideration to the earth, and it will instruct you; And the fish of the sea will declare it to you.
9 Who among all these does not know That the hand of Jehovah has done this?
10 In his hand is the life of every living thing And the spirit of every human.
11 Does not the ear test out words As the tongue tastes food?
12 Is not wisdom found among the aged, And does not understanding come with a long life?
13 With him there are wisdom and mightiness; He has counsel and understanding.
14 When he tears something down, it cannot be rebuilt; What he has shut, no man can open.
15 When he withholds the waters, everything dries up; When he sends them out, they overwhelm the earth.
16 With him there are strength and practical wisdom; To him belong the one going astray and the one leading astray;
17 He makes counselors go barefoot, And he makes fools of judges.
18 He loosens the bonds imposed by kings, And he binds a belt around their waist.
19 He makes priests walk barefoot, And he overthrows those who are firmly established in power;
20 He deprives trusted advisers of speech And takes away the sensibleness of old men;
21 He pours out contempt upon nobles, And he makes powerful ones weak;
22 He reveals deep things from the darkness, And he brings deep darkness into the light;
23 He makes nations grow great in order to destroy them; He enlarges nations, that he may lead them into exile.
24 He takes away the understanding of the leaders of the people And makes them wander in trackless wastelands.
25 They grope in darkness, where there is no light; He makes them wander about like drunken men.
13 “Yes, my eye has seen all of this, My ear has heard and understood it.
2 What you know, I also know; I am not inferior to you.
3 For my part, I would rather speak to the Almighty himself; I desire to argue my case with God.
4 But you are smearing me with lies; All of you are useless physicians.
5 If only you would keep absolutely silent, That would show wisdom on your part.
6 Listen, please, to my arguments, And pay attention to the pleadings of my lips.
7 Will you speak unjustly on God’s behalf, And will you speak deceitfully for him?
8 Will you take his side, Will you try to plead the case of the true God?
9 Would it turn out well if he examined you? Will you fool him as you would a mortal man?
10 He will surely rebuke you If you secretly try to show favoritism.
11 Will not his very dignity terrify you And the dread of him fall upon you?
12 Your wise sayings are proverbs of ashes; Your defenses are as fragile as defenses of clay.
13 Keep silent before me, so that I may speak. Then let whatever may come upon me come!
14 Why do I put myself in danger And take my life in my hands?
15 Though he may slay me, I would still wait; I would argue my case before his face.
16 He would then become my salvation, For no godless person may come in before him.
17 Listen closely to my word; Pay attention to my declaration.
18 See, now, I have prepared my legal case; I know I am in the right.
19 Who will contend with me? I would die if I were to stay silent!
20 Only grant two things to me, O God, So that I will not conceal myself from before you:
21 Remove your heavy hand far away from me, And do not let the fear of you terrify me.
22 Either call and I will answer, Or let me speak, and you answer me.
23 What are my errors and sins? Reveal to me my transgression and my sin.
24 Why do you hide your face And consider me your enemy?
25 Will you try to frighten a windblown leaf Or chase after dry stubble?
26 For you keep recording bitter accusations against me, And you make me answer for the sins of my youth.
27 You have put my feet in stocks, You scrutinize all my paths, And you trace out each of my footprints.
28 So man decays like something rotten, Like a garment eaten by moths.
14 “Man, born of woman, Is short-lived and filled with trouble.
2 He comes up like a blossom and then withers away; He flees like a shadow and disappears.
3 Yes, you have fixed your eye upon him, And you bring him into judgment with yourself.
4 Who can produce someone clean from someone unclean? No one can!
5 If his days are decided, The number of his months is with you; You have set a limit for him that he may not go beyond.
6 Turn your gaze away from him so that he may rest, Until, like a hired worker, he finishes out his day.
7 For there is hope even for a tree. If it is cut down, it will sprout again, And its twigs will continue to grow.
8 If its root grows old in the ground And its stump dies in the soil,
9 At the scent of water it will sprout; And it will produce branches like a new plant.
10 But a man dies and lies powerless; When a human expires, where is he?
11 Waters disappear from the sea, And a river drains away and dries up.
12 Man also lies down and does not get up. Until heaven is no more, they will not wake up, Nor will they be aroused from their sleep.
13 O that in the Grave you would conceal me, That you would hide me until your anger passes by, That you would set a time limit for me and remember me!
14 If a man dies, can he live again? I will wait all the days of my compulsory service Until my relief comes.
15 You will call, and I will answer you. You will long for the work of your hands.
16 But for now, you keep counting my every step; You watch only for my sin.
17 My transgression is sealed up in a bag, And you seal up my error with glue.
18 As a mountain falls and crumbles away And a rock is dislodged from its place,
19 As water wears away stones And its torrents wash away earth’s soil, So you have destroyed the hope of mortal man.
20 You keep overpowering him until he perishes; You change his appearance, and you send him away.
21 His sons are honored, but he does not know it; They become insignificant, but he does not realize it.
22 He feels pain only while he is still in his flesh; He mourns only while he is still alive.”
15 Elʹi·phaz the Teʹman·ite said in reply:
2 “Will a wise person answer with empty arguments, Or will he fill his belly with the east wind?
3 Reproving with mere words is useless, And talk alone is of no benefit.
4 For you undermine the fear of God, And you diminish any concern for God.
5 For your error dictates what you say, And you choose crafty speech.
6 Your own mouth condemns you, and not I; Your own lips testify against you.
7 Were you the first man ever born, Or was your birth before that of the hills?
8 Do you listen to the confidential talk of God, Or do you limit wisdom to yourself?
9 What do you know that we do not know? What do you understand that we do not?
10 Both the gray-haired and the aged are among us, Men much older than your father.
11 Are God’s consolations not enough for you, Or words spoken gently to you?
12 Why does your heart carry you away, And why do your eyes flash with anger?
13 For you turn your spirit against God himself, And you allow such words to go out of your own mouth.
14 What is mortal man that he should be pure, Or anyone born of a woman that he should be righteous?
15 Look! He has no faith in his holy ones, And even the heavens are not pure in his eyes.
16 How much less so when a person is detestable and corrupt, A man who drinks in unrighteousness just like water!
17 I will inform you; listen to me! I will relate what I have seen,
18 What wise men have related from their fathers, Things they have not hidden.
19 To them alone the land was given, And no stranger passed among them.
20 A wicked person suffers torment all his days, Throughout all the years reserved for the tyrant.
21 Terrifying sounds are in his ears; In a time of peace, marauders attack him.
22 He does not believe that he will escape from darkness; He is reserved for a sword.
23 He wanders about in search of food—where is it? He well knows that the day of darkness is at hand.
24 Distress and anguish keep terrifying him; They overpower him like a king ready to launch an attack.
25 For he raises his hand against God himself And tries to defy the Almighty;
26 He stubbornly rushes against Him, With his thick, strong shield;
27 His face is covered with fat, And his hips bulge with fat;
28 He resides in cities that will be brought to ruin, In houses where no one will dwell, Which will become heaps of stones.
29 He will not grow rich, and his wealth will not accumulate, Nor will his possessions spread over the land.
30 He will not escape from darkness; A flame will dry up his twig, And he will pass away by a blast of God’s mouth.
31 He should not go astray and trust in what is worthless, For what he gets in exchange will be worthless;
32 It will happen before his day, And his branches will never flourish.
33 He will be like a vine that shakes off its unripe grapes, And like an olive tree that casts off its blossoms.
34 For the assembly of godless ones is sterile, And fire will consume the tents of bribery.
35 They conceive trouble and give birth to what is wicked, And their womb produces deceit.”
16 Job said in reply:
2 “I have heard many things like these before. All of you are troublesome comforters!
3 Is there an end to empty words? What provokes you to answer this way?
4 I could also speak as you do. If you were in my place, I could make persuasive speeches against you And shake my head at you.
5 Instead, though, I would strengthen you with the words of my mouth, And the consolation of my lips would bring relief.
6 If I speak, my own pain is not relieved, And if I stop speaking, how much is my pain reduced?
7 But now he has made me weary; He has devastated my whole household.
8 You also seize me, and it has become a witness, So that my own skinniness rises up and testifies to my face.
9 His anger has torn me to pieces, and he harbors animosity against me. He grinds his teeth against me. My adversary pierces me with his eyes.
10 They have opened their mouth wide against me, And they have scornfully struck my cheeks; In large numbers they gather against me.
11 God hands me over to young boys, And he thrusts me into the hands of the wicked.
12 I was untroubled, but he shattered me; He grabbed me by the back of the neck and crushed me; Then he set me up as his target.
13 His archers surround me; He pierces my kidneys and feels no compassion; He pours out my gall on the earth.
14 He breaks through against me with breach after breach; He rushes at me like a warrior.
15 I have sewn sackcloth together to cover my skin, And I have buried my dignity in the dust.
16 My face is red from weeping, And on my eyelids is deep shadow,
17 Although my hands have done no violence And my prayer is pure.
18 O earth, do not cover my blood! And let there be no resting-place for my outcry!
19 Even now, my witness is in the heavens; The one who can testify for me is in the heights.
20 My companions ridicule me As my eye sheds tears to God.
21 Let someone arbitrate between a man and God, As one would between a man and his fellow.
22 For the years to come are few, And I will go away on the path of no return.
17 “My spirit has been broken, my days have been extinguished; The graveyard awaits me.
2 Mockers surround me, And my eye must gaze at their rebellious behavior.
3 Please accept my security, and keep it with you. Who else will shake hands with me and pledge in my behalf?
4 For you have concealed discernment from their heart; That is why you do not exalt them.
5 He may offer to share with his friends, While the eyes of his children fail.
6 He has made me an object of scorn among the peoples, So that I became one in whose face they spit.
7 From anguish my eyes grow dim, And all my limbs are but a shadow.
8 Upright people stare in amazement at this, And the innocent one is disturbed over the godless.
9 The righteous one keeps holding fast to his way, And the one with clean hands grows stronger.
10 However, you may all come and resume your arguing, For I have not found anyone wise among you.
11 My days are finished; My plans, the desires of my heart, have been shattered.
12 They keep turning night into day, Saying, ‘Light must be near because it is dark.’
13 If I wait, the Grave will become my home; I will spread out my bed in darkness.
14 I will call out to the pit, ‘You are my father!’ To the maggot, ‘My mother and my sister!’
15 Where, then, is my hope? Who can see hope for me?
16 It will go down to the barred gates of the Grave When we all descend together into the dust.”
18 Bilʹdad the Shuʹhite said in reply:
2 “How long before you stop making such speeches? Show some understanding so that we may then speak.
3 Why should we be viewed as animals And be considered stupid in your eyes?
4 Even if you tear yourself to pieces in your anger, Will the earth be abandoned for your sake, Or will the rock move away from its place?
5 Yes, the light of the wicked will be extinguished, And the flame of his fire will not shine.
6 The light in his tent will certainly grow dark, And the lamp over him will be extinguished.
7 His vigorous stride is shortened, And his own counsel will make him fall.
8 For his feet will lead him into a net, And he will wander onto its mesh.
9 A trap will seize him by the heel; A snare will catch him.
10 A rope is hidden for him on the ground, And a trap lies in his path.
11 Terrors frighten him on all sides And chase him at his feet.
12 His strength fails him, And disaster will make him stagger.
13 His skin is eaten away; The most deadly disease consumes his limbs.
14 He is torn away from the security of his tent And marched to the king of terrors.
15 Strangers will live in his tent; Sulfur will be scattered on his home.
16 His roots will dry up beneath him, And his branches will wither above him.
17 The memory of him will fade from the earth, And in the street his name will be unknown.
18 He will be driven from the light into the darkness And chased away from the productive land.
19 He will have no offspring and no descendants among his people, And he will be without a survivor in the place where he lives.
20 When his day comes, the people in the West will be appalled And the people in the East will be seized with horror.
21 This is what happens to the tents of a wrongdoer And to the place of the one who has not known God.”
19 Job said in reply:
2 “How long will you keep irritating my soul, Crushing me with words?
3 These ten times you have rebuked me; You are not ashamed to deal harshly with me.
4 And if indeed I made a mistake, My error remains with me.
5 If you insist on exalting yourselves over me, Claiming that the reproach against me is justified,
6 Know, then, that it is God who has misled me, And he has caught me in his hunting net.
7 Look! I keep crying out, ‘Violence!’ but I get no answer; I keep crying for help, but there is no justice.
8 My path he has blocked with a stone wall, and I cannot pass by; He has covered my roadways with darkness.
9 He has stripped me of my glory And removed the crown from my head.
10 He breaks me down on all sides until I perish; My hope he uproots like a tree.
11 His anger burns against me, And he views me as his enemy.
12 His troops come together and besiege me, And they camp around my tent.
13 My own brothers he has driven far away from me, And those who know me have turned away from me.
14 My close companions are gone, And those whom I knew well have forgotten me.
15 Guests in my house and my slave girls consider me a stranger; I am a foreigner in their eyes.
16 I call for my servant, but he does not respond; With my mouth I beg him for compassion.
17 My very breath has become loathsome to my wife, And I am a stench to my own brothers.
18 Even young children despise me; When I rise up, they begin jeering at me.
19 All my close friends detest me, And those whom I loved have turned against me.
20 My bones stick to my skin and my flesh, And I escape with the skin of my teeth.
21 Show me mercy, my companions, show me mercy, For God’s own hand has touched me.
22 Why do you keep persecuting me as God does, Attacking me without letup?
23 If only my words were written down, If only they could be inscribed in a book!
24 O that they were carved forever in the rock, With an iron stylus and lead!
25 For I well know that my redeemer is alive; He will come later and rise up over the earth.
26 After my skin has thus been destroyed, While yet in my flesh, I will see God,
27 Whom I will see for myself, Whom my own eyes will see, not someone else’s. But deep inside I feel overwhelmed!
28 For you say, ‘In what way are we persecuting him?’ Since the root of the problem is with me.
29 Be in fear of the sword yourselves, For the sword brings punishment against errors; You should know that there is a judge.”
20 Zoʹphar the Naʹa·ma·thite said in reply:
2 “This is why my own troubling thoughts urge me to answer Because of the agitation I feel.
3 I have heard a reproof that insults me; And my understanding impels me to reply.
4 Surely you must have always known this, For it has been so since man was put on the earth,
5 That the joyful cry of the wicked is brief And the rejoicing of the godless one is for a moment.
6 Although his greatness ascends to heaven And his head reaches to the clouds,
7 He will perish forever like his own dung; Those who used to see him will say, ‘Where is he?’
8 He will fly off like a dream, and they will not find him; He will be chased away like a vision of the night.
9 The eye that once saw him will not do so again, And his place will behold him no more.
10 His own children will seek the favor of the poor, And his own hands will give back his wealth.
11 His bones were full of youthful vigor, But it will lie down with him in mere dust.
12 If what is bad tastes sweet in his mouth, If he hides it under his tongue,
13 If he savors it and does not let it go But keeps holding it in his mouth,
14 His food will turn sour inside him; It will become like the poison of cobras within him.
15 He has swallowed down wealth, but he will vomit it up; God will empty it out of his belly.
16 The venom of cobras he will suck; The fangs of a viper will kill him.
17 He will never see the streams of water, The torrents of honey and butter.
18 He will give back his goods without consuming them; He will not enjoy the wealth from his trade.
19 For he has crushed and abandoned the poor; He has seized a house that he did not build.
20 But he will feel no peace within himself; His wealth will not help him escape.
21 There is nothing left for him to devour; That is why his prosperity will not last.
22 When his wealth reaches its peak, anxiety will overtake him; The full force of misfortune will come against him.
23 As he fills his belly, God will send his burning anger upon him, Raining it down upon him into his bowels.
24 When he flees from weapons of iron, Arrows from a copper bow will pierce him.
25 He pulls an arrow from his back, A glittering weapon from his gall, And terror seizes him.
26 Total darkness awaits his treasures; A fire that no one fanned will consume him; Calamity awaits any survivors in his tent.
27 Heaven will uncover his error; The earth will rise up against him.
28 A flood will sweep his house away; It will be a heavy torrent on the day of God’s anger.
29 This is the wicked man’s share from God, The inheritance that God has decreed for him.”
21 Job said in reply:
2 “Listen carefully to what I say; Let this be the consolation you give me.
3 Bear with me while I speak; After I speak, you may then mock me.
4 Is my complaint directed toward a man? If it were, would I not lose patience?
5 Look at me and stare in amazement; Put your hand over your mouth.
6 When I think about it, I am disturbed, And my whole body shudders.
7 Why do the wicked live on, Grow old, and become wealthy?
8 Their children are always in their presence, And they get to see their descendants.
9 Their houses are secure, they are free from fear, And God does not punish them with his rod.
10 Their bulls breed without failure; Their cows give birth and do not miscarry.
11 Their boys run outside just like a flock, And their children skip about.
12 They sing accompanied by tambourine and harp And rejoice at the sound of the flute.
13 They spend their days in contentment And go down peacefully to the Grave.
14 But they say to the true God, ‘Leave us alone! We have no desire to know your ways.
15 Who is the Almighty, that we should serve him? What would we gain by being acquainted with him?’
16 But I know that they do not control their own prosperity. The thinking of the wicked is far from me.
17 How often is the lamp of the wicked extinguished? How often does disaster come upon them? How often does God deal out destruction to them in his anger?
18 Do they ever become like straw before the wind And like chaff that a storm wind carries away?
19 God will store up a man’s punishment for his own sons. But may God repay him so that he will know it.
20 May his own eyes see his ruin, And may he be the one to drink from the rage of the Almighty.
21 For what does he care about what happens to his house after him If the number of his months is cut short?
22 Can anyone teach knowledge to God, When He is the one who judges even the highest ones?
23 One man dies in his full vigor When he is completely carefree and at ease,
24 When his thighs are padded with fat And his bones are strong.
25 But another man dies deeply distressed, Never having tasted good things.
26 Together they will lie down in the dust, And maggots will cover both of them.
27 Look! I know exactly what you are thinking And the schemes you devise to wrong me.
28 For you say, ‘Where is the house of the prominent man, And where is the tent in which the wicked one lived?’
29 Have you not questioned travelers? Do you not carefully study their observations,
30 That an evil person is spared on the day of disaster And rescued on the day of fury?
31 Who will confront him about his way, And who will repay him for what he has done?
32 When he is carried to the graveyard, A vigil will be kept over his tomb.
33 The clods of earth of the valley will be sweet to him, And all mankind follows after him Like the countless number before him.
34 So why offer me meaningless comfort? There is nothing but deceit in your answers!”
22 Elʹi·phaz the Teʹman·ite said in reply:
2 “Can a man be of use to God? Can anyone with insight be of benefit to him?
3 Does the Almighty care that you are righteous, Or does he gain anything because you follow the course of integrity?
4 Will he punish you And enter into judgment with you for your reverence?
5 Is it not because your own wickedness is so great And there is no end to your errors?
6 For you seize a pledge from your brothers for no reason, And you strip people of their garments, leaving them naked.
7 You do not give the tired one a drink of water, And you hold back food from the hungry.
8 The land belongs to the powerful man, And the favored one dwells in it.
9 But you sent away widows empty-handed, And you crushed the arms of fatherless children.
10 That is why you are surrounded by traps, And sudden terrors frighten you;
11 That is why it is so dark that you cannot see, And a flood of water covers you.
12 Is not God in the heights of heaven? And see how high all the stars are.
13 But you have said: ‘What does God really know? Can he judge through thick gloom?
14 Clouds screen him off so that he does not see As he walks about on the vault of heaven.’
15 Will you follow the ancient path That wicked men have walked,
16 Men who have been snatched away before their time, Whose foundation was washed away by a flood?
17 They were saying to the true God: ‘Leave us alone!’ And ‘What can the Almighty do to us?’
18 Yet, he is the One who filled their houses with good things. (Such wicked thinking is far from my own.)
19 The righteous will see this and rejoice, And the innocent will mock them and say:
20 ‘Our opponents have been destroyed, And a fire will consume what is left of them.’
21 Get to know Him, and you will be at peace; Then good things will come your way.
22 Accept the law from his mouth, And keep his sayings in your heart.
23 If you return to the Almighty, you will be restored; If you remove unrighteousness from your tent,
24 If you would throw your gold into the dust And the gold of Oʹphir into the rocky ravines,
25 Then the Almighty will become your gold, And he will be your choicest silver.
26 For then your delight will be in the Almighty, And you will lift up your face to God.
27 You will entreat him, and he will hear you; And your vows you will pay.
28 Whatever you decide to do will succeed, And light will shine upon your path.
29 For you will be humiliated when you speak arrogantly, But he will save the humble.
30 He will rescue those who are innocent; So if your hands are clean, you will certainly be rescued.”
23 Job said in reply:
2 “Even today I will complain stubbornly; My strength is exhausted because of my sighing.
3 If only I knew where to find God! I would go to his place of dwelling.
4 I would present my case before him And fill my mouth with arguments;
5 I would learn how he would answer me And take note of what he says to me.
6 Would he contend with me using his great power? No, surely he would give me a hearing.
7 There the upright one could set matters straight with him, And I would be acquitted once and for all by my Judge.
8 But if I go east, he is not there; And I return and I cannot find him.
9 When he is working on the left, I cannot look upon him; Then he turns to the right, but I still do not see him.
10 But he knows the path I have taken. After he has tested me, I will come out as pure gold.
11 My feet have closely followed his footsteps; I have kept to his way without deviating.
12 I have not departed from the commandment of his lips. I have treasured up his sayings even more than what was required of me.
13 When he is determined, who can resist him? When he wants to do something, he does it.
14 For he will carry out completely what has been determined for me, And he has many such things in store.
15 That is why I am anxious because of him; When I think about him, my fear grows.
16 God has made me fainthearted, And the Almighty has made me afraid.
17 But I have not yet been silenced by the darkness Nor by the gloom that has covered my face.
24 “Why does the Almighty not set a time? Why do those who know him not see his day?
2 People move boundary markers; They carry off flocks for their own pasture.
3 They drive away the donkey of fatherless children And seize the widow’s bull as security for a loan.
4 They force the poor off the road; The helpless of the earth must hide from them.
5 The poor forage for food like wild donkeys in the wilderness; They seek food in the desert for their children.
6 They must harvest in another’s field And glean from the vineyard of the wicked.
7 They spend the night naked, without clothing; They have no covering for the cold.
8 They are drenched by the mountain rains; They cling to the rocks for lack of shelter.
9 The fatherless child is snatched away from the breast; And the garments of the poor are taken as security for a loan,
10 Forcing them to go about naked, without clothing, And hungry, as they carry the sheaves of grain.
11 They toil among the terrace walls in the heat of the day; They tread the winepresses, yet they go thirsty.
12 The dying keep groaning in the city; The fatally wounded cry for help, But God does not regard this as improper.
13 There are those who rebel against light; They do not recognize its ways, And they do not follow its paths.
14 The murderer rises at daybreak; He slays the helpless and the poor, While at night he engages in theft.
15 The eye of the adulterer waits for the twilight, Saying, ‘No one will see me!’ And he covers his face.
16 In the darkness they break into houses; By day they shut themselves in. They are strangers to the light.
17 For morning is the same as deep darkness for them; They are familiar with the terrors of deep darkness.
18 But they are swiftly carried away by the waters. Their portion of the land will be cursed. They will not return to their vineyards.
19 Just as drought and heat take away the melted snow, The Grave takes away those who have sinned!
20 His mother will forget him; the maggot will feast on him. He will be remembered no more. And unrighteousness will be broken just like a tree.
21 He preys on the barren woman, And mistreats the widow.
22 God will use his strength to do away with the powerful; Though they may rise up, they have no assurance of life.
23 God lets them become confident and secure, But his eyes are on everything they do.
24 They are exalted for a little while, then they are no more. They are brought low and gathered like everyone else; They are cut off like heads of grain.
25 Now who can prove me a liar Or refute my word?”
25 Bilʹdad the Shuʹhite said in reply:
2 “Rulership and fearsome might are his; He establishes peace in heaven.
3 Can his troops be numbered? Upon whom does his light not rise?
4 So how can mortal man be righteous before God, Or how can one born of a woman be innocent?
5 Even the moon is not bright And the stars are not pure in his eyes,
6 How much less so mortal man, who is a maggot, And a son of man, who is a worm!”
26 Job said in reply:
2 “How you have helped the one with no power! How you have saved the arm that has no strength!
3 What great advice you have given to the one lacking wisdom! How freely you have revealed your practical wisdom!
4 To whom are you trying to speak, And who inspired you to say such things?
5 Those who are powerless in death tremble; They are even lower than the waters and their inhabitants.
6 The Grave is naked in front of God, And the place of destruction lies uncovered.
7 He stretches out the northern sky over empty space, Suspending the earth upon nothing;
8 He wraps up the waters in his clouds, So that the clouds do not burst under their weight;
9 He shuts off the view of his throne, Spreading out his cloud over it.
10 He marks out the horizon on the surface of the waters; He makes a boundary between light and darkness.
11 The very pillars of heaven shake; They are stunned by his rebuke.
12 He stirs up the sea with his power, And by his understanding he breaks the sea monster to pieces.
13 With his breath he makes the skies clear; His hand pierces the elusive serpent.
14 Look! These are just the fringes of his ways; Only a faint whisper has been heard of him! So who can understand his mighty thunder?”
27 Job continued his discourse, saying:
2 “As surely as God lives, who has deprived me of justice, As the Almighty lives, who has made me bitter,
3 As long as my breath is within me And spirit from God is in my nostrils,
4 My lips will not speak unrighteousness; Nor will my tongue mutter deceit!
5 It is unthinkable for me to declare you men righteous! Until I die, I will not renounce my integrity!
6 I will maintain my righteousness and never let it go; My heart will not condemn me as long as I live.
7 May my enemy become like the wicked, Those assaulting me like the unrighteous.
8 For what hope does the godless man have when he is destroyed, When God takes away his life?
9 Will God hear his outcry When distress comes upon him?
10 Or will he find delight in the Almighty? Will he call on God at all times?
11 I will teach you about the power of God; I will not hide anything about the Almighty.
12 Look! If you have all seen visions, Why are your speeches completely empty?
13 This is the wicked man’s share from God, The inheritance that tyrants receive from the Almighty.
14 If his sons become many, they will fall by the sword, And his descendants will not have enough food.
15 Those who survive him will be buried by the plague, And their widows will not weep for them.
16 Even if he piles up silver like the dust And stores up fine clothing like the clay,
17 Though he may gather it, The righteous man will wear it, And the innocent will divide up his silver.
18 The house he builds is as fragile as a moth’s cocoon, Like a shelter made by a watchman.
19 He will go to bed rich but will gather nothing; When he opens his eyes, nothing will be there.
20 Terror overtakes him like a flood; A storm snatches him away by night.
21 An east wind will carry him off, and he will be gone; It sweeps him away from his place.
22 It will hurl itself at him without pity As he desperately tries to flee from its force.
23 It claps its hands at him And whistles at him from its place.
28 “There is a place to mine silver And a place for gold that they refine;
2 Iron is taken from the ground, And copper is smelted from rocks.
3 Man conquers the darkness; He probes to the limit in the gloom and darkness, Searching for ore.
4 He sinks a shaft far from where people reside, In forgotten places, far from where people walk; Some men descend and swing suspended.
5 Food grows on top of the earth; But below, there is an upheaval as if by fire.
6 There in the stones is sapphire, And the dust contains gold.
7 No bird of prey knows the path to it; The eye of a black kite has not seen it.
8 No majestic beasts have trodden on it; The young lion has not prowled there.
9 Man strikes the flinty rock with his hand; He overturns the mountains at their foundation.
10 He cuts water channels in the rock; His eyes spot every precious thing.
11 He dams up the sources of rivers And brings what was hidden to the light.
12 But wisdom—where can it be found, And where is the source of understanding?
13 No man recognizes its value, And it cannot be found in the land of the living.
14 The deep waters say, ‘It is not in me!’ And the sea says, ‘It is not with me!’
15 It cannot be bought with pure gold; Nor can silver be weighed out in exchange for it.
16 It cannot be bought with gold of Oʹphir Nor with rare onyx and sapphire.
17 Gold and glass cannot be compared to it; Nor can a vessel of fine gold be exchanged for it.
18 Coral and crystal are not worthy of mention, For a bagful of wisdom is worth more than one full of pearls.
19 The topaz of Cush cannot be compared to it; It cannot be purchased even with pure gold.
20 But from where does wisdom come, And where is the source of understanding?
21 It has been hidden from the eyes of every living thing And concealed from the birds of the heavens.
22 Destruction and death say, ‘Our ears have heard only a report of it.’
23 God understands the way to find it; He alone knows where it resides,
24 For he looks to the ends of the earth, And he sees everything under the heavens.
25 When he set the force of the wind And measured out the waters,
26 When he made a regulation for the rain And a path for the thunderous storm cloud,
27 Then he saw wisdom and explained it; He established and tested it.
28 And he said to man: ‘Look! The fear of Jehovah—that is wisdom, And to turn away from bad is understanding.’”
29 Job continued his discourse, saying:
2 “If only I were in the months gone by, In the days when God was watching over me,
3 When he caused his lamp to shine upon my head, When I walked through darkness by his light,
4 When I was in my prime, When God’s friendship was felt in my tent,
5 When the Almighty was still with me, When my children were all around me,
6 When my steps were awash in butter, And the rocks poured out streams of oil for me.
7 When I used to go out to the city gate And take my seat in the public square,
8 The young men would see me and step aside, And even the old men would rise and remain standing.
9 Princes refrained from speaking; They would put their hand over their mouth.
10 The voices of the prominent men were silenced; Their tongue was stuck to the roof of their mouth.
11 Whoever heard me would speak well of me, And those who saw me would testify for me.
12 For I would rescue the poor who cried for help, Along with the fatherless child and anyone who had no helper.
13 The one about to perish would bless me, And I made the heart of the widow rejoice.
14 I put on righteousness as my clothing; My justice was like a robe and a turban.
15 I became eyes to the blind And feet to the lame.
16 I was a father to the poor; I would investigate the legal case of those I did not know.
17 I would break the jaws of the wrongdoer And tear the prey away from his teeth.
18 I used to say, ‘I will die in my own home, And my days will be as numerous as the grains of sand.
19 My roots will spread out into the waters, And dew will stay all night on my branches.
20 My glory is constantly renewed, And the bow in my hand will keep shooting.’
21 People would listen expectantly, Waiting in silence for my advice.
22 After I had spoken, they had nothing more to say; My words would fall gently on their ears.
23 They waited for me as for the rain; They opened their mouth wide as for the spring rain.
24 When I smiled at them, they could hardly believe it; The light of my face would reassure them.
25 I gave them direction as their head, And I lived like a king among his troops, Like one who comforts the mourners.
30 “Now they laugh at me —Men younger than I am, Whose fathers I would have refused To put with the dogs that guarded my flock.
2 Of what use was the power of their hands to me? Their vigor has perished.
3 They are worn out from want and hunger; They gnaw at the parched ground That was already ruined and desolated.
4 They gather the salt herb from the bushes; Their food is the root of broom trees.
5 They are driven out of the community; People shout at them as they would at a thief.
6 They live on the slopes of ravines, In holes in the ground and in the rocks.
7 From the bushes they cry out And huddle together among the nettles.
8 As sons of the senseless and the nameless ones, They have been driven out of the land.
9 But now they mock me even in their songs; I have become an object of scorn to them.
10 They detest me and keep their distance from me; They do not hesitate to spit in my face.
11 Because God has disarmed me and humbled me, They throw off all restraint in my presence.
12 On my right they rise up like a mob; They put me to flight And put up barriers of destruction in my path.
13 They tear up my roadways And make my calamity worse, Without anyone to stop them.
14 They come as if through a wide breach in the wall; They roll in amid the devastation.
15 Terror overwhelms me; My dignity is driven away like the wind, And my salvation vanishes like a cloud.
16 Now my life ebbs from me; Days of affliction take hold of me.
17 Aching pierces my bones at night; The gnawing pain never stops.
18 With great force my garment is disfigured; Like the collar of my garment, it chokes me.
19 God has thrown me down into the mud; I am reduced to dust and ashes.
20 I cry to you for help, but you do not answer me; I stand up, but you just look at me.
21 You have cruelly turned against me; With the full might of your hand, you assault me.
22 You pick me up and carry me off with the wind; Then you toss me about in the storm.
23 For I know that you will bring me down to death, To the house where everyone living will meet.
24 But no one would strike at a broken man As he cries for help during his time of disaster.
25 Have I not wept for those who have fallen on hard times? Have I not grieved for the poor?
26 Although I hoped for good, bad came; I expected the light, but darkness came.
27 The churning inside me did not stop; Days of affliction confronted me.
28 I walk about gloomy; there is no sunlight. In the assembly, I rise and cry for help.
29 I have become a brother to jackals And a companion to the daughters of the ostrich.
30 My skin has blackened and fallen off; My bones burn from the heat.
31 My harp is used only for mourning, And my flute for the sound of weeping.
31 “I have made a covenant with my eyes. So how could I show improper attention to a virgin?
2 What, then, would be my share from God above, What inheritance from the Almighty on high?
3 Does not disaster await the wrongdoer And calamity those doing what is harmful?
4 Does he not see my ways And count all my steps?
5 Have I ever walked in untruth? Has my foot hurried to deceive?
6 Let God weigh me with accurate scales; Then he will recognize my integrity.
7 If my footsteps deviate from the way Or my heart has followed after my eyes Or my hands have been defiled,
8 Then let me sow seed and someone else eat, And let what I plant be uprooted.
9 If my heart has been enticed by a woman And I have lain in wait at my neighbor’s door,
10 Then let my wife grind grain for another man, And let other men have sexual relations with her.
11 For that would be shameful conduct, An error deserving punishment by the judges.
12 It would be a fire that would devour and destroy, Consuming even the roots of all my produce.
13 If I denied justice to my male or female servants When they had a complaint against me,
14 What can I do when God confronts me? What can I answer him when he calls for an accounting?
15 Did not the One who made me in the womb also make them? Was it not the same One who formed us before our birth?
16 If I refused to give the poor what they desired Or saddened the eyes of the widow;
17 If I ate my portion of food alone Without sharing it with the orphans;
18 (For from my youth the orphan grew up with me as though I were his father, And I have been a guide for the widow from childhood.)
19 If I saw anyone perishing for lack of clothing Or a poor man with nothing to cover himself;
20 If he did not bless me As he warmed himself with the wool of my sheep;
21 If I shook my fist against the orphan When he needed my assistance in the city gate;
22 Then let my arm fall from my shoulder, And let my arm be broken at the elbow.
23 For I dreaded disaster from God, And I could not stand before his dignity.
24 If I put my confidence in gold Or said to fine gold, ‘You are my security!’
25 If I found my joy in my great wealth Because of the many possessions I acquired;
26 If I saw the sun shining Or the moon moving in its splendor;
27 And my heart was secretly enticed, And my mouth kissed my hand in worship of them;
28 Then that would be an error deserving punishment by the judges, For I would have denied the true God above.
29 Have I ever rejoiced over the destruction of my enemy Or gloated because evil befell him?
30 I never allowed my mouth to sin By asking for his life in an oath.
31 Have the men of my tent not said, ‘Who can find anyone who has not been satisfied with his food?’
32 No stranger had to spend the night outside; I opened my doors to the traveler.
33 Have I ever tried to cover over my transgressions, like other men, By hiding my error in the pocket of my garment?
34 Have I been in fear of the reaction of the multitude, Or have I been terrified by the contempt of other families, Making me silent and afraid to go outside?
35 If only someone would listen to me! I would sign my name to what I have said. Let the Almighty answer me! If only my accuser had written out the charges in a document!
36 I would carry it on my shoulder, And I would bind it around my head like a crown.
37 I would give him an accounting for every step I took; I would approach him confidently, like a prince.
38 If my own ground would cry out against me And its furrows would weep together;
39 If I have eaten its fruitage without payment, Or if I have caused its owners to despair;
40 Then let thorns sprout for me instead of wheat And foul-smelling weeds instead of barley.” The words of Job end here.
32 So these three men stopped trying to answer Job, because he was convinced of his own righteousness.
2 But E·liʹhu the son of Barʹa·chel the Buzʹite of the family of Ram had become very angry. His anger blazed against Job for trying to prove himself right rather than God.
3 He was also very angry with Job’s three companions because they could not find an answer but had declared God wicked.
4 E·liʹhu had been waiting to respond to Job, because they were older than he was.
5 When E·liʹhu saw that the three men had nothing to say in answer, his anger flared up.
6 So E·liʹhu the son of Barʹa·chel the Buzʹite began to speak, saying: “I am young And you men are aged. So I respectfully held back, And I dared not tell you what I know.
7 I thought, ‘Let age speak, And let a multitude of years declare wisdom.’
8 But it is the spirit in people, The breath of the Almighty, that gives them understanding.
9 Age alone does not make one wise, Nor is it only old men who understand what is right.
10 So I say, ‘Listen to me, And I will also tell you what I know.’
11 Look! I have waited for your words; I kept listening to your reasoning As you searched for things to say.
12 I paid close attention to you, But none of you could prove Job wrong Or answer his arguments.
13 So do not say, ‘We have found wisdom; It is God who refutes him, not a man.’
14 He did not direct his words against me, So I will not reply to him with your arguments.
15 They are dismayed, they have no more answers; They have nothing left to say.
16 I have waited, but they do not continue speaking; They just stand there, with no further answer.
17 So I too will give an answer; I too will tell what I know,
18 For I am full of words; The spirit within me compels me.
19 My insides are like wine that has no vent, Like new wineskins ready to burst.
20 Let me speak so that I can find relief! I will open my lips and give an answer.
21 I will not show partiality to anyone; Nor will I flatter any human,
22 For I do not know how to flatter; If I did, my Maker would quickly do away with me.
33 “But now, Job, please hear my words; Listen to everything I say.
2 Look, please! I must open my mouth; My tongue must speak.
3 My words declare the uprightness of my heart, And my lips sincerely tell what I know.
4 God’s own spirit made me, And the Almighty’s own breath brought me to life.
5 Reply to me if you are able; Present your arguments before me; take your position.
6 Look! I am just like you before the true God; From the clay I too was shaped.
7 So no fear of me should terrify you, And no pressure from me should overwhelm you.
8 But you said in my hearing, Yes, I kept hearing these words,
9 ‘I am pure, without transgression; I am clean, without error.
10 But God finds reasons to oppose me; He considers me his enemy.
11 He puts my feet in stocks; He scrutinizes all my paths.’
12 But you are not right in saying this, so I will answer you: God is far greater than mortal man.
13 Why do you complain against Him? Is it because he did not answer all your words?
14 For God speaks once and a second time, But no one pays attention,
15 In a dream, a vision of the night, When deep sleep falls upon people While they sleep in their beds.
16 Then he uncovers their ears And impresses his instruction upon them,
17 To turn a person away from wrongdoing And to protect a man from pride.
18 God spares his soul from the pit, His life from perishing by the sword.
19 A person is also reproved by pain on his bed And by the constant distress of his bones,
20 So that his very being loathes bread, And he rejects even fine food.
21 His flesh wastes away from sight, And his bones that were hidden now protrude.
22 His soul draws near to the pit; His life to those who bring death.
23 If there is a messenger for him, One advocate out of a thousand, To tell to man what is upright,
24 Then God shows him favor and says, ‘Spare him from going down into the pit! I have found a ransom!
25 Let his flesh become fresher than in youth; Let him return to the days of his youthful vigor.’
26 He will entreat God, who will accept him, And he will see His face with shouts of joy, And He will restore His righteousness to mortal man.
27 That person will declare to men, ‘I have sinned and distorted what is right, But I did not receive what I deserved.
28 He has redeemed my soul from going into the pit, And my life will see the light.’
29 Indeed, God does all these things Twice, three times, for a man,
30 To bring him back from the pit, So that he may be enlightened with the light of life.
31 Pay attention, Job! Listen to me! Keep silent, and I will continue speaking.
32 If you have something to say, reply to me. Speak, for I want to prove you right.
33 If you have nothing to say, you should listen to me; Keep silent, and I will teach you wisdom.”
34 So E·liʹhu continued to say in reply:
2 “Listen to my words, you who are wise; Hear me, you who know so much.
3 For the ear tests words Just as the tongue tastes food.
4 Let us evaluate for ourselves what is right; Let us decide among ourselves what is good.
5 For Job has said, ‘I am in the right, But God has denied me justice.
6 Would I lie about what my own judgment should be? My wound is incurable, though there is no transgression.’
7 What other man is like Job, Who drinks up derision like water?
8 He is in company with wrongdoers And in association with wicked men.
9 For he has said, ‘A man does not benefit From trying to please God.’
10 So listen to me, you men of understanding: It is unthinkable for the true God to act wickedly, For the Almighty to do wrong!
11 For he will reward a man according to what he does And bring upon him the consequences of his ways.
12 For a certainty, God does not act wickedly; The Almighty does not pervert justice.
13 Who put him in charge of the earth, And who appointed him over the whole world?
14 If he fixes his attention on them, If he gathers their spirit and breath to himself,
15 All humans would perish together, And mankind would return to the dust.
16 So if you have understanding, pay attention to this; Listen carefully to what I say.
17 Should someone who hates justice be in control, Or would you condemn a powerful one who is righteous?
18 Would you say to a king, ‘You are good for nothing,’ Or to nobles, ‘You are wicked’?
19 There is One who does not show partiality to princes And who does not favor the rich over the poor, For they are all the work of his hands.
20 They may die suddenly, in the middle of the night; They shake violently and pass away; Even the powerful are removed, but not by human hands.
21 For God’s eyes are upon the ways of a man, And He sees all his steps.
22 There is no darkness or deep shadow Where wrongdoers can conceal themselves.
23 For God has not set an appointed time for any man To appear before him in judgment.
24 He breaks the powerful without needing to investigate And sets up others in their place.
25 For he knows what they are doing; He overthrows them during the night, and they are crushed.
26 He strikes them for their wickedness, In a place where all can see,
27 Because they have turned away from following him And have no regard for any of his ways;
28 They cause the poor to cry out to him, So that he hears the outcry of the helpless.
29 When God remains silent, who can condemn him? When he hides his face, who can see him? Whether toward a nation or a man, the result is the same,
30 So that a godless person may not rule Or lay snares for the people.
31 For will anyone say to God, ‘I have been punished, although I have committed no offense;
32 Teach me what I have failed to see; If I have done anything wrong, I will not do it again’?
33 Should he reward you on your terms when you reject his judgment? You must decide, not I. So tell me what you know so well.
34 Men of understanding will say to me —Any wise man who hears me—
35 ‘Job speaks without knowledge, And his words lack insight.’
36 Let Job be tested to the limit Because his replies are like those of wicked men!
37 He adds rebellion to his sin; He scornfully claps his hands before us And multiplies his words against the true God!”
35 E·liʹhu continued his response:
2 “Are you so convinced that you are right that you would say, ‘I am more righteous than God’?
3 For you say, ‘What does it matter to you? Am I better off than if I had sinned?’
4 I will reply to you And to your companions with you.
5 Look up to heaven and see, Observe the clouds, which are high above you.
6 If you sin, how do you hurt him? If your transgressions multiply, what do you do to him?
7 If you are righteous, what do you give him; What does he receive from you?
8 Your wickedness affects only a human like yourself, And your righteousness, a son of man.
9 People cry out when under great oppression; They cry for relief from the domination of the powerful.
10 But no one says, ‘Where is God, my Grand Maker, The one causing songs to be sung in the night?’
11 He teaches us more than the beasts of the earth, And he makes us wiser than the birds of the heavens.
12 People cry out, but he does not answer, Because of the pride of the wicked.
13 Surely God does not hear an empty cry; The Almighty does not pay attention to it.
14 How much less, then, when you complain that you do not see him! Your legal case is before him, so you should wait anxiously for him.
15 For he has not angrily called for an accounting; Nor has he taken note of your extreme rashness.
16 Job opens his mouth wide in vain; He multiplies words without knowledge.”
36 E·liʹhu continued:
2 “Be patient with me a little longer while I explain, For I still have words to speak on God’s behalf.
3 I will speak comprehensively about what I know, And I will ascribe righteousness to my Maker.
4 Truly my words are not false; The One perfect in knowledge is here before you.
5 Indeed, God is mighty and rejects no one; He is great in his power of understanding.
6 He will not preserve the lives of the wicked, But he gives justice to the afflicted.
7 He does not take his eyes off the righteous; He enthrones them with kings, and they are exalted forever.
8 But if they are bound in shackles And caught in ropes of affliction,
9 He reveals to them what they have done, Their transgressions caused by their pride.
10 He opens their ears to correction And tells them to turn away from wrongdoing.
11 If they obey and serve him, They will live out their days in prosperity, And their years will be pleasant.
12 But if they do not obey, they will perish by the sword And die without knowledge.
13 The godless at heart will harbor resentment. They do not cry for help even when he binds them.
14 They die while still young, Spending their life among male temple prostitutes.
15 But God rescues the afflicted during their affliction; He opens their ear when they are oppressed.
16 He draws you away from the brink of distress To a broad space, free of restriction, With rich food on your table as consolation.
17 Then you will be satisfied with the judgment on the wicked, When judgment is rendered and justice is upheld.
18 But take care that rage does not lead you into spitefulness, And do not let a large bribe lead you astray.
19 Would your cry for help Or any of your strenuous efforts keep you from distress?
20 Do not long for the night, When people vanish from their place.
21 Beware that you do not turn to wrongdoing, Choosing this instead of affliction.
22 Look! God is exalted in his power; What instructor is like him?
23 Who has directed his way Or said to him, ‘What you have done is wrong’?
24 Remember to magnify his activity, Of which men have sung.
25 All mankind has seen it, Mortal man looks on from a distance.
26 Yes, God is greater than we can know; The number of his years is beyond comprehension.
27 He draws up the drops of water; They condense into rain from his mist;
28 Then the clouds pour it down; They shower down upon mankind.
29 Can anyone understand the layers of clouds, The thundering from his tent?
30 See how he spreads his lightning over it And covers the depths of the sea.
31 By these he sustains the peoples; He gives them food in abundance.
32 With his hands he covers the lightning, And he directs it against its target.
33 His thunder tells about him, Even the livestock tell who is coming.
37 “At this my heart pounds And leaps from its place.
2 Listen carefully to the rumbling of his voice And the thunder that comes from his mouth.
3 He unleashes it under the entire heavens And sends his lightning to the ends of the earth.
4 After that is a roaring sound; He thunders with a majestic voice, And he does not hold it back when his voice is heard.
5 God thunders with his voice in a wonderful way; He does great things that are beyond our understanding.
6 For he says to the snow, ‘Fall to the earth,’ And to the downpour of rain, ‘Pour down mightily.’
7 God puts a stop to all human activity So that every mortal man will know His work.
8 The wild animals go into their dens And remain in their lairs.
9 The storm wind blows from its chamber, And the cold comes from the north winds.
10 By the breath of God, the ice is produced, And the broad waters are frozen solid.
11 Yes, he weighs down the clouds with moisture; He scatters his lightning in the clouds;
12 They swirl around where he directs them; They carry out whatever he commands on the surface of the inhabited earth.
13 Whether it is for punishment or for the sake of the land Or for loyal love, he causes it to happen.
14 Listen to this, Job; Stop and consider carefully the wonderful works of God.
15 Do you know how God controls the clouds And how he causes the lightning to flash from his cloud?
16 Do you know how the clouds float? These are the wonderful works of the One perfect in knowledge.
17 Why does your clothing become hot When the earth is still because of the south wind?
18 Can you, with him, spread out the skies As solid as a metal mirror?
19 Tell us what we should say to him; We cannot answer because we are in the dark.
20 Should he be told that I want to speak? Or has anyone said something that should be communicated to him?
21 They cannot even see the light, Though it is bright in the sky, Until a wind passes by and clears away the clouds.
22 Out of the north comes golden splendor; God’s majesty is awe-inspiring.
23 Understanding the Almighty is beyond our reach; He is great in power, And he never violates his justice and abundant righteousness.
24 Therefore, people should fear him. For he does not favor any who think that they are wise.”
38 Then Jehovah answered Job out of the windstorm:
2 “Who is this who is obscuring my counsel And speaking without knowledge?
3 Brace yourself, please, like a man; I will question you, and you inform me.
4 Where were you when I founded the earth? Tell me, if you think you understand.
5 Who set its measurements, in case you know, Or who stretched a measuring line across it?
6 Into what were its pedestals sunk, Or who laid its cornerstone,
7 When the morning stars joyfully cried out together, And all the sons of God began shouting in applause?
8 And who barricaded the sea behind doors When it burst out from the womb,
9 When I clothed it with clouds And wrapped it in thick gloom,
10 When I established my limit for it And put its bars and doors in place,
11 And I said, ‘You may come this far, and no farther; Here is where your proud waves will stop’?
12 Have you ever commanded the morning Or made the dawn know its place,
13 To take hold of the ends of the earth And to shake the wicked out of it?
14 It is transformed like clay under a seal, And its features stand out like those of a garment.
15 But the light of the wicked is held back from them, And their uplifted arm is broken.
16 Have you gone down to the sources of the sea Or explored the deep waters?
17 Have the gates of death been revealed to you, Or have you seen the gates of deep darkness?
18 Have you understood the vast expanse of the earth? Tell me, if you know all of this.
19 In which direction does the light reside? And where is the place of darkness,
20 That you should take it to its territory And understand the paths to its home?
21 Do you know this because you were already born And the number of your years is great?
22 Have you entered the storehouses of the snow, Or have you seen the storehouses of the hail,
23 Which I have reserved for the time of distress, For the day of battle and war?
24 From what direction is light dispersed, And from where does the east wind blow on the earth?
25 Who has cut a channel for the flood And made a path for the thunderous storm cloud,
26 To make it rain where no man lives, On the wilderness where there are no humans,
27 To satisfy devastated wastelands And cause the grass to sprout?
28 Does the rain have a father, Or who fathered the dewdrops?
29 From whose womb did the ice emerge, And who gave birth to the frost of heaven
30 When the waters are covered as if with stone, And the surface of the deep waters is frozen solid?
31 Can you tie the ropes of the Kiʹmah constellation Or untie the cords of the Keʹsil constellation?
32 Can you lead out a constellation in its season Or guide the Ash constellation along with its sons?
33 Do you know the laws governing the heavens, Or can you impose their authority on the earth?
34 Can you raise your voice to the clouds To cause a flood of water to cover you?
35 Can you send out lightning bolts? Will they come and say to you, ‘Here we are!’
36 Who put wisdom within the clouds Or gave understanding to the sky phenomenon?
37 Who is wise enough to count the clouds, Or who can tip over the water jars of heaven
38 When the dust pours into a mass And the clods of earth stick together?
39 Can you hunt prey for a lion Or satisfy the appetites of young lions
40 When they crouch in their lairs Or lie in ambush in their dens?
41 Who prepares food for the raven When its young cry to God for help And wander about because there is nothing to eat?
39 “Do you know the time when the mountain goats give birth? Have you watched the deer give birth to their young?
2 Do you count the months that they must complete? Do you know the time when they give birth?
3 They crouch down when they give birth to their young, And their labor pains end.
4 Their young become strong and grow up in the open field; They go out and do not return to them.
5 Who set the wild donkey free, And who untied the ropes of the wild donkey?
6 I have made the desert plain its home And the salt land its dwelling.
7 It scorns the tumult of the city; It does not hear the shouts of the driver.
8 It roams the hills, seeking pasture, Looking for every green plant.
9 Is the wild bull willing to serve you? Will it spend the night in your stable?
10 Will you hold a wild bull to the furrow with a rope, Or will it follow you to plow the valley?
11 Will you trust in its great strength And let it do your heavy work?
12 Will you rely on it to bring back your harvest, And will it gather it to your threshing floor?
13 The wings of the ostrich flap joyfully, But can her pinions and plumage compare with the stork’s?
14 For she leaves her eggs on the ground, And she keeps them warm in the dust.
15 She forgets that some foot may crush them Or that a wild animal may trample them.
16 She treats her sons harshly, as if they were not hers; She has no fear that her labor may be in vain.
17 For God has deprived her of wisdom And given her no share in understanding.
18 But when she rises up and flaps her wings, She laughs at the horse and at its rider.
19 Are you the one who gives the horse its strength? Do you clothe its neck with a rustling mane?
20 Can you cause it to leap like a locust? Its majestic snorting is terrifying.
21 It paws the ground in the valley and exults mightily; It charges into the battle.
22 It laughs at fear and is afraid of nothing. It does not turn back because of the sword.
23 The quiver rattles against it, The spear and the javelin flash.
24 Trembling with excitement, it surges forward, It cannot stand still at the sound of the horn.
25 When the horn blows, it says, ‘Aha!’ It smells the battle from afar And hears the shouting of commanders and the battle cry.
26 Is it by your understanding that the falcon soars, Spreading its wings to the south?
27 Or is it at your order that an eagle flies upward And builds its nest high up,
28 Spending the night on a cliff, Dwelling in its stronghold on a rocky crag?
29 From there it searches for food; Its eyes look far into the distance.
30 Its young sip up blood; And wherever the slain are, there it is.”
40 Jehovah continued to answer Job:
2 “Should a faultfinder contend with the Almighty? Let the one who wants to reprove God answer.”
3 Job said in answer to Jehovah:
4 “Look! I am unworthy. What can I reply to you? I put my hand over my mouth.
5 I spoke once, but I will not answer again; Twice, but I will say no more.”
6 Then Jehovah answered Job out of the windstorm:
7 “Brace yourself, please, like a man; I will question you, and you inform me.
8 Will you call into question my justice? Will you condemn me so that you may be right?
9 Do you have an arm as powerful as the true God’s, Or can your voice thunder like his?
10 Adorn yourself, please, with glory and majesty; Clothe yourself with dignity and splendor.
11 Release the fury of your anger; Look at everyone who is haughty, and bring him low.
12 Look at everyone who is haughty, and humble him, And tread down the wicked where they stand.
13 Hide them all in the dust; Bind them in the hidden place,
14 Then even I would acknowledge to you That your right hand can save you.
15 Here, now, is Be·heʹmoth, which I made as I made you. It eats grass like a bull.
16 Look at the strength in its hips And the power in the muscles of its belly!
17 It stiffens its tail like a cedar; The sinews of its thighs are woven together.
18 Its bones are tubes of copper; Its limbs are like wrought-iron rods.
19 It ranks first among the works of God; Only its Maker can approach it with his sword.
20 For the mountains produce food for it, Where all the wild animals play.
21 It lies down under the lotus trees, In the shelter of the reeds of the marsh.
22 The lotus trees cast their shadow on it, And the poplars of the valley surround it.
23 If the river is turbulent, it does not panic. It is confident, although the Jordan rushes against its mouth.
24 Can anyone capture it while it is watching, Or pierce its nose with a hook?
41 “Can you catch Le·viʹa·than with a fishhook Or hold down its tongue with a rope?
2 Can you put a rope through its nostrils Or pierce its jaws with a hook?
3 Will it make many pleas to you, Or will it speak gently to you?
4 Will it make a covenant with you, So that you may make it your slave for life?
5 Will you play with it as with a bird Or tie it on a leash for your little girls?
6 Will traders barter for it? Will they divide it up among merchants?
7 Will you fill its hide with harpoons Or its head with fishing spears?
8 Lay your hand on it; You will remember the battle and never do it again!
9 Any hope of subduing it is futile. The mere sight of it would overwhelm you.
10 No one dares to stir it up. So who is it who can stand up to me?
11 Who has given me anything first that I should repay him? Whatever is under the heavens is mine.
12 I will not be silent about its limbs, About its mightiness and its well-formed body.
13 Who has removed its outer covering? Who will enter its open jaws?
14 Who can pry open the doors of its mouth? Its teeth all around are fearsome.
15 Its back has rows of scales Tightly sealed together.
16 Each one fits so closely to the other That no air can come between them.
17 They are stuck to one another; They cling together and cannot be separated.
18 Its snorting flashes out light, And its eyes are like the rays of dawn.
19 Flashes of lightning go out of its mouth; Fiery sparks escape.
20 Smoke pours out of its nostrils, Like a furnace fueled with rushes.
21 Its breath sets coals ablaze, And a flame shoots from its mouth.
22 There is great strength in its neck, And dismay runs before it.
23 The folds of its flesh are tightly joined together; They are firm, as though cast upon it and immovable.
24 Its heart is hard as stone, Yes, hard as a lower millstone.
25 When it rises up, even the mighty are frightened; Its thrashing causes bewilderment.
26 No sword that reaches it will prevail; Nor will spear, dart, or arrowhead.
27 It regards iron as straw, Copper as rotten wood.
28 An arrow does not make it flee; Slingstones turn into stubble against it.
29 It regards a club as stubble, And it laughs at the rattling of a javelin.
30 Underneath, it is like sharp fragments of pottery; It spreads itself in the mud like a threshing sledge.
31 It makes the deep boil just like a pot; It stirs up the sea like an ointment pot.
32 It leaves a glistening wake in its path. One would think that the deep had white hair.
33 There is nothing like it on the earth, A creature made to have no fear.
34 It glares at everything that is haughty. It is king over all the majestic wild beasts.”
BOOK ONE (Psalms 1-41) 1 Happy is the man who does not walk according to the advice of the wicked And does not stand on the path of sinners And does not sit in the seat of scoffers.
2 But his delight is in the law of Jehovah, And he reads His law in an undertone day and night.
3 He will be like a tree planted by streams of water, A tree that produces fruit in its season, The foliage of which does not wither. And everything he does will succeed.
4 The wicked are not like that; They are like the chaff that the wind blows away.
5 That is why the wicked will not remain standing in the judgment; Nor will sinners remain standing in the assembly of the righteous.
6 For Jehovah is aware of the way of the righteous, But the way of the wicked will perish.
2 Why are the nations agitated And the peoples muttering an empty thing?
2 The kings of the earth take their stand And high officials gather together as one Against Jehovah and against his anointed one.
3 They say: “Let us tear off their shackles And throw off their ropes!”
4 The One enthroned in the heavens will laugh; Jehovah will scoff at them.
5 At that time he will speak to them in his anger And terrify them in his burning anger,
6 Saying: “I myself have installed my king On Zion, my holy mountain.”
7 Let me proclaim the decree of Jehovah; He said to me: “You are my son; Today I have become your father.
8 Ask of me, and I will give nations as your inheritance And the ends of the earth as your possession.
9 You will break them with an iron scepter, And you will smash them like a piece of pottery.”
10 So now, you kings, show insight; Accept correction, you judges of the earth.
11 Serve Jehovah with fear, And rejoice with trembling.
12 Honor the son, or God will become indignant And you will perish from the way, For His anger flares up quickly. Happy are all those taking refuge in Him.
A melody of David when he was fleeing from his son Abʹsa·lom. 3 O Jehovah, why have my adversaries become so numerous? Why are so many rising up against me?
2 Many are saying about me: “God will not save him.” (Selah)
3 But you, O Jehovah, are a shield around me, My glory and the One who lifts up my head.
4 I will call aloud to Jehovah, And he will answer me from his holy mountain. (Selah)
5 I will lie down and sleep; And I will wake up in safety, For Jehovah continues to support me.
6 I am not afraid of the tens of thousands Lined up against me on every side.
7 Rise up, O Jehovah! Save me, O my God! For you will strike all my enemies on the jaw; You will break the teeth of the wicked.
8 Salvation belongs to Jehovah. Your blessing is upon your people. (Selah)
To the director; to be accompanied with stringed instruments. A melody of David. 4 When I call, answer me, O my righteous God. Make a way of escape for me in my distress. Show me favor and hear my prayer.
2 You sons of men, how long will you turn my honor into humiliation? How long will you love what is worthless and search for what is false? (Selah)
3 Know that Jehovah will treat his loyal one in a special way; Jehovah will hear when I call to him.
4 Be agitated, but do not sin. Have your say in your heart, upon your bed, and keep silent. (Selah)
5 Offer the sacrifices of righteousness, And trust in Jehovah.
6 There are many saying: “Who will show us anything good?” Let the light of your face shine upon us, O Jehovah.
7 You have filled my heart with greater rejoicing Than those who have an abundant harvest of grain and new wine.
8 I will lie down and sleep in peace, For you alone, O Jehovah, make me dwell in security.
To the director for Neʹhi·loth. A melody of David. 5 Listen to my words, O Jehovah; Be attentive to my sighing.
2 Pay attention to my cry for help, O my King and my God, because to you I pray.
3 O Jehovah, you will hear my voice in the morning; In the morning I will express my concern to you and wait expectantly.
4 For you are not a God who takes pleasure in wickedness; No one bad may remain with you.
5 No arrogant person may stand in your presence. You hate all those who behave wickedly;
6 You will destroy those who speak lies. Jehovah detests violent and deceptive people.
7 But I will come into your house because of your great loyal love; I will bow down toward your holy temple in reverential fear of you.
8 Lead me, O Jehovah, in your righteousness because of my foes; Make your way clear for me.
9 For nothing they say can be trusted; Within them is nothing but malice; Their throat is an open grave; They flatter with their tongue.
10 But God will declare them guilty; Their own schemes will cause their downfall. May they be driven away because of their many transgressions, For they have rebelled against you.
11 But all those who take refuge in you will rejoice; They will always shout joyfully. You will block approach to them, And those loving your name will rejoice in you.
12 For you will bless anyone righteous, O Jehovah; You will surround them with approval as with a large shield.
To the director; to be accompanied with stringed instruments tuned to Shemʹi·nith. A melody of David. 6 O Jehovah, do not reprove me in your anger, And do not correct me in your rage.
2 Show me favor, O Jehovah, for I am growing weak. Heal me, O Jehovah, for my bones are shaking.
3 Yes, I am greatly disturbed, And I ask you, O Jehovah—how long will it be?
4 Return, O Jehovah, and rescue me; Save me for the sake of your loyal love.
5 For in death there is no mention of you; In the Grave, who will praise you?
6 I have grown weary with my sighing; All night long I soak my bed with tears; I flood my couch with weeping.
7 My eye is weak from my grief; It has dimmed because of all those harassing me.
8 Get away from me, all you who behave wickedly, For Jehovah will hear the sound of my weeping.
9 Jehovah will hear my request for favor; Jehovah will accept my prayer.
10 All my enemies will be put to shame and dismayed; They will fall back in sudden disgrace.
A dirge of David that he sang to Jehovah regarding the words of Cush the Benʹja·min·ite. 7 O Jehovah my God, in you I have taken refuge. Save me from all those persecuting me and rescue me.
2 Otherwise they will tear me to pieces as a lion does, Carrying me off with no one to rescue me.
3 O Jehovah my God, if I am at fault in this, If I have acted unjustly,
4 If I have wronged the one doing good to me, Or if I have plundered my enemy without cause,
5 Then let an enemy pursue and overtake me; Let him trample my life down to the earth And cause my glory to perish in the dust. (Selah)
6 Rise up in your anger, O Jehovah; Stand up against the fury of my enemies; Awake for me, and demand that justice be done.
7 Let the nations surround you; And you will act against them from on high.
8 Jehovah will pass sentence on the peoples. Judge me, O Jehovah, according to my righteousness And according to my integrity.
9 Please put an end to the evil deeds of the wicked. But establish the righteous, Since you are the righteous God who examines the hearts and the deepest emotions.
10 God is my shield, the Savior of those upright in heart.
11 God is a righteous Judge, And God proclaims his judgments every day.
12 If anyone will not repent, He sharpens his sword; He bends his bow and makes it ready.
13 He prepares his deadly weapons; He makes ready his flaming arrows.
14 Look at the one who is pregnant with wickedness; He conceives trouble and gives birth to lies.
15 He excavates a pit and digs it deep, But he falls into the very hole he made.
16 The trouble he causes will return on his own head; His violence will fall on the crown of his head.
17 I will praise Jehovah for his justice; I will sing praises to the name of Jehovah the Most High.
To the director; upon the Gitʹtith. A melody of David. 8 O Jehovah our Lord, how majestic your name is throughout the earth; You have set your splendor even higher than the heavens!
2 Out of the mouth of children and infants you have established strength On account of your adversaries, To silence the enemy and the avenger.
3 When I see your heavens, the works of your fingers, The moon and the stars that you have prepared,
4 What is mortal man that you keep him in mind, And a son of man that you take care of him?
5 You made him a little lower than godlike ones, And you crowned him with glory and splendor.
6 You gave him dominion over the works of your hands; You have put everything under his feet:
7 All the flocks and cattle, As well as the wild animals,
8 The birds of the heavens and the fish of the sea, Whatever passes through the paths of the seas.
9 O Jehovah our Lord, how majestic your name is throughout the earth!
To the director; upon Muth-labʹben. A melody of David.  9 I will praise you, O Jehovah, with all my heart; I will tell about all your wonderful works.
2 I will rejoice and exult in you; I will sing praises to your name, O Most High.
3 When my enemies retreat, They will stumble and perish from before you.
4 For you defend my just cause; You sit on your throne judging with righteousness.
5 You have rebuked nations and destroyed the wicked, Blotting out their name forever and ever.
6 The enemy has been ruined forever; You uprooted their cities, And all memory of them will perish.
7 But Jehovah is enthroned forever; He has firmly established his throne for justice.
8 He will judge the inhabited earth in righteousness; He will render righteous legal decisions for the nations.
9 Jehovah will become a secure refuge for the oppressed, A secure refuge in times of distress.
10 Those knowing your name will trust in you; You will never abandon those seeking you, O Jehovah.
11 Sing praises to Jehovah, who is dwelling in Zion; Make his deeds known among the peoples.
12 For the One who avenges their blood remembers them; He will not forget the cry of the afflicted.
13 Show me favor, O Jehovah; see my affliction by those hating me, You who raise me from the gates of death,
14 So that I may declare your praiseworthy deeds in the gates of the daughter of Zion, And rejoice in your acts of salvation.
15 The nations have sunk down into the pit they made; Their own foot has been caught in the net they hid.
16 Jehovah is known by the judgment he executes. The wicked one has been ensnared in the work of his own hands. Hig·gaʹion. (Selah)
17 The wicked will retreat toward the Grave, All the nations who forget God.
18 But the poor will not always be forgotten; Nor will the hope of the meek ever perish.
19 Rise up, O Jehovah! Do not let mortal man prevail. May the nations be judged in your presence.
20 Strike them with fear, O Jehovah, Let the nations know that they are only mortal men. (Selah)
10 Why, O Jehovah, do you stand at a distance? Why do you hide yourself in times of distress?
2 The wicked one arrogantly pursues the helpless one, But he will be caught in the schemes he devises.
3 For the wicked one boasts about his selfish desires And blesses the greedy one;  He disrespects Jehovah.
4 In his haughtiness, the wicked man makes no investigation; All his thoughts are: “There is no God.”
5 His ways keep prospering, But your judgments are beyond his understanding; He scoffs at all his adversaries.
6 He says in his heart: “I will never be shaken; For generation after generation I will never see calamity.”
7 His mouth is full of curses, lies, and threats; Under his tongue are trouble and injury.
8 He waits in ambush near the settlements; From his hiding place he kills an innocent one.  His eyes are watching for an unfortunate victim.
9 He waits in his hiding place like a lion in its lair. He waits to seize the helpless one. He seizes the helpless one when he pulls his net shut.
10 The victim is crushed and brought down; The unfortunate ones fall into his clutches.
11 He says in his heart: “God has forgotten. He has turned away his face. He never notices.”
12 Rise up, O Jehovah. O God, lift up your hand. Do not forget the helpless ones.
13 Why has the wicked one disrespected God? He says in his heart: “You will not hold me accountable.”
14 But you do see trouble and distress. You look on and take matters in hand. To you the unfortunate victim turns; You are the helper for the fatherless child.
15 Break the arm of the wicked and evil man, So that when you search for his wickedness, You will find it no more.
16 Jehovah is King forever and ever. The nations have perished from the earth.
17 But you will hear the request of the meek, O Jehovah. You will make their hearts firm and pay close attention to them.
18 You will render justice to the fatherless and to those who are crushed, So that mortal man of the earth may no longer make them afraid.
To the director. Of David. 11 In Jehovah I have taken refuge. So how can you say to me: “Flee like a bird to your mountain!
2 See how the wicked bend the bow; They set their arrow on the bowstring, To shoot from the darkness those upright in heart.
3 When the foundations are torn down, What can the righteous do?”
4 Jehovah is in his holy temple. Jehovah’s throne is in the heavens. His own eyes see, his watchful eyes examine the sons of men.
5 Jehovah examines the righteous one as well as the wicked one; He hates anyone who loves violence.
6 Upon the wicked, he will rain down snares; Fire and sulfur and a scorching wind will be the portion of their cup.
7 For Jehovah is righteous; he loves righteous acts. The upright will see his face.
To the director; tuned to Shemʹi·nith. A melody of David. 12 Save me, O Jehovah, for the loyal one is no more; Faithful people have vanished from among men.
2 They speak lies to one another; They flatter with their lips and speak with deceitful hearts.
3 Jehovah will cut off all flattering lips And the tongue that makes great boasts,
4 Those who say: “We will prevail with our tongues. We use our lips as we please; Who will be our master?”
5 “Because the afflicted are oppressed, Because of the sighing of the poor, I will rise up to act,” says Jehovah. “I will save them from those who treat them with contempt.”
6 The sayings of Jehovah are pure; They are like silver refined in an earthen furnace, purified seven times.
7 You will guard them, O Jehovah; You will protect each one of them from this generation forever.
8 The wicked walk around unrestrained Because the sons of men promote depravity.
To the director. A melody of David. 13 How long, O Jehovah, will you forget me? Forever? How long will you hide your face from me?
2 How long will I have anxious concern, With grief in my heart each day? How long will my enemy triumph over me?
3 Look upon me and answer me, O Jehovah my God. Give light to my eyes, so that I may not fall asleep in death,
4 So that my enemy will not say: “I have defeated him!” Do not let my opponents rejoice over my downfall.
5 As for me, I trust in your loyal love; My heart will rejoice in your acts of salvation.
6 I will sing to Jehovah, for he has richly rewarded me.
To the director. Of David. 14 The foolish one says in his heart: “There is no Jehovah.” Their actions are corrupt, and their dealings are detestable; No one is doing good.
2 But Jehovah looks down from heaven on the sons of men To see whether anyone has insight, whether anyone is seeking Jehovah.
3 They have all turned aside; They are all alike corrupt. No one is doing good, Not even one.
4 Do none of the wrongdoers understand? They devour my people as if they were eating bread. They do not call on Jehovah.
5 But they will be filled with great terror, For Jehovah is with the generation of the righteous.
6 You wrongdoers try to frustrate the plans of the lowly one, But Jehovah is his refuge.
7 O that Israel’s salvation may come from Zion! When Jehovah gathers back his captive people, Let Jacob be joyful, let Israel rejoice.
A melody of David. 15 O Jehovah, who may be a guest in your tent? Who may reside in your holy mountain?
2 The one who is walking faultlessly, Practicing what is right And speaking the truth in his heart.
3 He does not slander with his tongue, He does nothing bad to his neighbor, And he does not defame his friends.
4 He rejects anyone who is contemptible, But he honors those fearing Jehovah. He does not go back on his promise, even when it is bad for him.
5 He does not lend his money on interest, And he does not accept a bribe against the innocent. Whoever does these things will never be shaken.
A mikʹtam of David. 16 Protect me, O God, for I have taken refuge in you.
2 I have said to Jehovah: “You are Jehovah, my Source of goodness.
3 And the holy ones in the earth, The majestic ones, bring me great delight.”
4 Those who pursue other gods multiply their sorrows. I will never pour out their drink offerings of blood, Nor will my lips mention their names.
5 Jehovah is my portion, my allotted share, and my cup. You safeguard my inheritance.
6 Pleasant places have been measured out to me. Yes, I am content with my inheritance.
7 I will praise Jehovah, who has given me advice. Even during the night, my innermost thoughts correct me.
8 I keep Jehovah before me constantly. Because he is at my right hand, I will never be shaken.
9 So my heart rejoices, my whole being is joyful. And I reside in security.
10 For you will not leave me in the Grave. You will not allow your loyal one to see the pit.
11 You make known to me the path of life. In your presence is abundant joy; There is happiness at your right hand forever.
A prayer of David. 17 Hear my plea for justice, O Jehovah; Pay attention to my cry for help; Listen to my prayer spoken without deceit.
2 May you make a just decision in my behalf; May your eyes see what is right.
3 You have examined my heart, you have inspected me by night; You have refined me; You will find that I have not schemed anything bad, And my mouth has not transgressed.
4 As for the activities of men, In accord with the word of your lips, I avoid the paths of the robber.
5 Let my steps stay on your tracks So that my feet will not stumble.
6 I do call on you, because you will answer me, O God. Incline your ear to me. Hear my words.
7 Show your loyal love in a wonderful way, O Savior of those seeking refuge at your right hand From those who rebel against you.
8 Guard me like the pupil of your eye; Conceal me in the shadow of your wings.
9 Guard me from the wicked who attack me, From my mortal enemies who surround me.
10 They have become insensitive; With their mouth they speak arrogantly;
11 Now they hem us in; They watch for the chance to cause our downfall.
12 He is like a lion eager to tear its prey to pieces, Like a young lion crouching in ambush.
13 Rise up, O Jehovah, to confront him and bring him down; Rescue me from the wicked with your sword;
14 Rescue me with your hand, O Jehovah, From men of this world, whose share is in this life, Those whom you fill with the good things you provide And who leave an inheritance to their many sons.
15 But as for me, in righteousness I will see your face; I am satisfied to awaken in your presence.
To the director. By Jehovah’s servant David, who addressed the words of this song to Jehovah in the day that Jehovah rescued him from the hand of all his enemies and from the hand of Saul. He said: 18 I have affection for you, O Jehovah, my strength.
2 Jehovah is my crag and my stronghold and the One who rescues me. My God is my rock, in whom I take refuge, My shield and my horn of salvation, my secure refuge.
3 I call on Jehovah, who is worthy of praise, And I will be saved from my enemies.
4 The ropes of death encircled me; Flash floods of worthless men terrified me.
5 The ropes of the Grave surrounded me; The snares of death confronted me.
6 In my distress I called on Jehovah, To my God I kept crying for help. From his temple he heard my voice, And my cry to him for help reached his ears.
7 Then the earth began to shake and rock; The foundations of the mountains trembled And shook back and forth because he had been angered.
8 Smoke ascended from his nostrils, And a consuming fire came from his mouth; Glowing coals blazed from him.
9 He made the heavens bend as he descended, And thick gloom was beneath his feet.
10 He rode on a cherub and came flying. He swooped down on the wings of a spirit.
11 He then covered himself in darkness, All around him as a shelter, Dark waters and thick clouds.
12 From the brightness before him Hail and fiery coals broke through the clouds.
13 Then Jehovah began to thunder in the heavens; The Most High made his voice heard With hailstones and fiery coals.
14 He shot his arrows and scattered them; He hurled his lightning and threw them into confusion.
15 The streambeds became visible; The foundations of the land were exposed by your rebuke, O Jehovah, By the blast of the breath from your nostrils.
16 He reached down from on high; He took hold of me and pulled me from deep waters.
17 He rescued me from my strong enemy, From those hating me, who were stronger than I was.
18 They confronted me on the day of my disaster, But Jehovah was my support.
19 He brought me out into a place of safety; He rescued me because he was pleased with me.
20 Jehovah rewards me according to my righteousness; He repays me according to the innocence of my hands.
21 For I have kept the ways of Jehovah, And I have not wickedly abandoned my God.
22 All his judgments are before me; I will not disregard his statutes.
23 I will remain blameless before him, And I will keep myself from error.
24 May Jehovah repay me according to my righteousness, According to the innocence of my hands before him.
25 With someone loyal you act in loyalty; With the blameless man you deal blamelessly;
26 With the pure you show yourself pure, But with the crooked you show yourself shrewd.
27 For you save those who are lowly But you abase the haughty.
28 For it is you who light my lamp, O Jehovah, My God who lights up my darkness.
29 With your help I can charge against a marauder band; By God’s power I can scale a wall.
30 The way of the true God is perfect; The saying of Jehovah is refined. He is a shield to all those taking refuge in him.
31 For who is a God besides Jehovah? And who is a rock except our God?
32 The true God is the one who clothes me with strength, And he will make my way perfect.
33 He makes my feet like those of a deer; He makes me stand on high places.
34 He trains my hands for warfare; My arms can bend a bow of copper.
35 You give me your shield of salvation, Your right hand supports me, And your humility makes me great.
36 You widen the path for my footsteps; My feet will not slip.
37 I will pursue my enemies and overtake them; I will not return until they are wiped out.
38 I will crush them so that they cannot rise up; They will fall under my feet.
39 You will equip me with strength for the battle; You will make my foes collapse under me.
40 You will make my enemies retreat from me, And I will put an end to those who hate me.
41 They cry for help, but there is no one to save them; They even cry to Jehovah, but he does not answer them.
42 I will pound them as fine as dust in the wind; I will throw them out like mud in the streets.
43 You will rescue me from the faultfinding of the people. You will appoint me the head of nations. A people whom I have not known will serve me.
44 At a mere report they will obey me; Foreigners will come cringing before me.
45 Foreigners will lose courage; They will come trembling from their strongholds.
46 Jehovah is alive! Praised be my Rock! Let the God of my salvation be exalted.
47 The true God executes vengeance for me; He subdues the peoples under me.
48 He rescues me from my angry enemies; You lift me high above those who attack me; You save me from the man of violence.
49 That is why I will glorify you among the nations, O Jehovah, And to your name I will sing praises.
50 He performs great acts of salvation for his king; He displays loyal love to his anointed one, To David and his offspring forever.
To the director. A melody of David. 19 The heavens are declaring the glory of God; The skies above proclaim the work of his hands.
2 Day after day their speech bubbles forth, And night after night they reveal knowledge.
3 There is no speech, and there are no words; Their voice is not heard.
4 But into all the earth their sound has gone out, And to the ends of the inhabited earth their message. In the heavens he has pitched a tent for the sun;
5 It is like a bridegroom emerging from the bridal chamber; It rejoices like a mighty man running his course.
6 It emerges from one end of the heavens, And it circles to their other end; And nothing is concealed from its heat.
7 The law of Jehovah is perfect, restoring strength. The reminder of Jehovah is trustworthy, making the inexperienced one wise.
8 The orders from Jehovah are righteous, causing the heart to rejoice; The commandment of Jehovah is clean, making the eyes shine.
9 The fear of Jehovah is pure, lasting forever. The judgments of Jehovah are true, altogether righteous.
10 They are more desirable than gold, Than much fine gold, And sweeter than honey, the honey that drips from the combs.
11 By them your servant has been warned; In keeping them, there is a large reward.
12 Who can discern mistakes? Pronounce me innocent from sins I am unaware of.
13 And hold your servant back from presumptuous acts; Do not let them dominate me. Then I will be complete, And innocent of blatant sins.
14 May the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart Be pleasing to you, O Jehovah, my Rock and my Redeemer.
To the director. A melody of David. 20 May Jehovah answer you in the day of distress. May the name of the God of Jacob protect you.
2 May he send you help from the holy place And sustain you from Zion.
3 May he remember all your gift offerings; May he accept with favor your burnt offering. (Selah)
4 May he grant you the desires of your heart And give success to all your plans.
5 We will shout joyfully over your acts of salvation; We will lift our banners in the name of our God. May Jehovah fulfill all your requests.
6 Now I do know that Jehovah saves his anointed one. He answers him from his holy heavens With great salvation by his right hand.
7 Some rely on chariots and others on horses, But we call on the name of Jehovah our God.
8 They have collapsed and fallen, But we have risen up and been restored.
9 O Jehovah, save the king! He will answer us in the day we call for help.
To the director. A melody of David. 21 O Jehovah, in your strength the king rejoices; How greatly he rejoices in your acts of salvation!
2 You have granted him the desire of his heart, And you have not withheld the request of his lips. (Selah)
3 For you meet him with rich blessings; You place a crown of fine gold on his head.
4 He asked you for life, and you gave it to him, A long life, forever and ever.
5 Your acts of salvation bring him great glory. Dignity and splendor you bestow on him.
6 You make him blessed forever; You make him glad with the joy of your presence.
7 For the king trusts in Jehovah; Because of the loyal love of the Most High, he will never be shaken.
8 Your hand will find all your enemies; Your right hand will find those hating you.
9 You will make them like a fiery furnace at the appointed time when you give them attention. Jehovah will swallow them up in his anger, and fire will consume them.
10 Their descendants you will destroy from the earth, And their offspring from the sons of men.
11 For they intended to do what is bad against you; They have devised schemes that will not succeed.
12 For you will make them retreat By aiming your bow at them.
13 Rise up, O Jehovah, in your strength. We will sing praises to your mightiness.
To the director; set to “The Doe of the Dawn.” A melody of David. 22 My God, my God, why have you forsaken me? Why are you far from saving me, Far from my cries of anguish?
2 My God, I keep calling by day, and you do not answer; And by night there is no silence on my part.
3 But you are holy, Surrounded by the praises of Israel.
4 In you our fathers put their trust; They trusted, and you kept rescuing them.
5 To you they cried out, and they were saved; They trusted in you, and they were not disappointed.
6 But I am a worm and not a man, Scorned by men and despised by the people.
7 All those seeing me mock me; They sneer and shake their heads in derision:
8 “He entrusted himself to Jehovah. Let Him rescue him! Let Him save him, for he is so dear to Him!”
9 You were the One who brought me out of the womb, The One who made me feel secure on my mother’s breasts.
10 I have been entrusted to your care from birth; From my mother’s womb, you have been my God.
11 Do not stay far off from me, for trouble is near And I have no other helper.
12 Many young bulls surround me; Powerful bulls of Baʹshan encircle me.
13 They open their mouth wide against me, Like a roaring lion that tears its prey to pieces.
14 I am poured out like water; All my bones are out of joint. My heart has become like wax; It melts deep within me.
15 My strength has dried up like a piece of pottery; My tongue sticks to my gums; You are bringing me down to the dust of death.
16 For dogs surround me; They close in on me like a pack of evildoers, Like a lion they are at my hands and feet.
17 I can count all my bones. They look on and stare at me.
18 They divide my garments among themselves, And they cast lots for my clothing.
19 But you, O Jehovah, do not remain far away. You are my strength; hurry to help me.
20 Save me from the sword, My precious life from the paws of dogs;
21 Save me from the mouth of the lion and the horns of wild bulls; Answer and save me.
22 I will declare your name to my brothers; In the midst of the congregation I will praise you.
23 You who fear Jehovah, praise him! All you offspring of Jacob, glorify him! Stand in awe of him, all you offspring of Israel.
24 For he has not despised nor loathed the suffering of the oppressed one; He has not hidden his face from him. When he cried to him for help, he heard.
25 I will praise you in the large congregation; I will pay my vows before those who fear him.
26 The meek will eat and be satisfied; Those seeking Jehovah will praise him. May you enjoy life forever.
27 All the ends of the earth will remember and turn to Jehovah. All the families of the nations will bow down before you.
28 For the kingship belongs to Jehovah; He rules over the nations.
29 All the prosperous ones of the earth will eat and will bow down; All those going down to the dust will kneel before him; None of them can preserve their lives.
30 Their descendants will serve him; The generation to come will be told about Jehovah.
31 They will come and tell of his righteousness. They will tell the people yet to be born what he has done.
A melody of David. 23 Jehovah is my Shepherd. I will lack nothing.
2 In grassy pastures he makes me lie down; He leads me to well-watered resting-places.
3 He refreshes me. He leads me in the paths of righteousness for the sake of his name.
4 Though I walk in the valley of deep shadow, I fear no harm, For you are with me; Your rod and your staff reassure me.
5 You prepare a table for me before my enemies. You refresh my head with oil; My cup is well-filled.
6 Surely goodness and loyal love will pursue me all the days of my life, And I will dwell in the house of Jehovah for all my days.
Of David. A melody. 24 To Jehovah belong the earth and everything in it, The productive land and those dwelling on it.
2 For he has solidly fixed it on the seas And firmly established it on the rivers.
3 Who may ascend to the mountain of Jehovah, And who may stand up in his holy place?
4 Anyone with innocent hands and a pure heart, Who has not sworn a false oath by My life, Nor taken an oath deceitfully.
5 He will receive blessings from Jehovah And righteousness from his God of salvation.
6 This is the generation of those seeking him, Of those seeking your face, O God of Jacob. (Selah)
7 Lift up your heads, you gates; Open up, you ancient doorways, That the glorious King may enter!
8 Who is this glorious King? Jehovah, strong and mighty, Jehovah, mighty in battle.
9 Lift up your heads, you gates; Open up, you ancient doorways, That the glorious King may enter!
10 Who is he, this glorious King? Jehovah of armies—he is the glorious King. (Selah)
Of David.  25 To you, O Jehovah, I turn.
2 My God, I trust in you; Do not let me be put to shame. Do not let my enemies gloat over me.
3 Surely none who hope in you will be put to shame, But shame awaits those who are treacherous without cause.
4 Make me know your ways, O Jehovah; Teach me your paths.
5 Cause me to walk in your truth and teach me, For you are my God of salvation.  In you I hope all day long.
6 Remember your mercy, O Jehovah, and your loyal love, Which you have always shown.
7 Do not remember the sins of my youth and my transgressions. Remember me according to your loyal love, For the sake of your goodness, O Jehovah.
8 Good and upright is Jehovah. That is why he instructs sinners in the way to live.
9 He will guide the meek in what is right, And he will teach the meek ones his way.
10 All the paths of Jehovah are loyal love and faithfulness For those observing his covenant and his reminders.
11 For the sake of your name, O Jehovah, Forgive my error, though it is great.
12 Who is the man fearing Jehovah? He will instruct him about the way he should choose.
13 He will experience what is good, And his descendants will take possession of the earth.
14 Close friendship with Jehovah belongs to those who fear him, And he makes his covenant known to them.
15 My eyes are always toward Jehovah, For he will free my feet from the net.
16 Turn your face to me and show me favor, For I am alone and helpless.
17 The distresses of my heart have multiplied; Free me from my anguish.
18 See my affliction and my trouble, And pardon all my sins.
19 See how numerous my enemies are And how violent their hatred is for me.
20 Guard my life and save me. Do not let me be put to shame, for I have taken refuge in you.
21 May integrity and uprightness safeguard me, For my hope is in you.
22 O God, rescue Israel out of all his distresses.
Of David. 26 Judge me, O Jehovah, for I have walked in my integrity; In Jehovah I have trusted without wavering.
2 Examine me, O Jehovah, and put me to the test; Refine my innermost thoughts and my heart.
3 For your loyal love is always in front of me, And I walk in your truth.
4 I do not associate with deceitful men, And I avoid those who hide what they are.
5 I hate the company of evil men, And I refuse to associate with the wicked.
6 I will wash my hands in innocence, And I will march around your altar, O Jehovah,
7 To cause the sound of thanksgiving to be heard And to declare all your wonderful works.
8 Jehovah, I love the house where you dwell, The place where your glory resides.
9 Do not sweep me away with sinners Nor take my life away with violent men,
10 Whose hands engage in shameful conduct, And whose right hand is full of bribes.
11 But as for me, I will walk in my integrity. Rescue me and show me favor.
12 My foot is standing on level ground; In the great congregation, I will praise Jehovah.
Of David. 27 Jehovah is my light and my salvation. Whom should I fear? Jehovah is the stronghold of my life. Whom should I dread?
2 When evil men attacked me to devour my flesh, My adversaries and my enemies were the ones who stumbled and fell.
3 Though an army should set up camp against me, My heart will not fear. Though war should break out against me, Even then I will remain confident.
4 One thing I have asked from Jehovah —It is what I will look for— That I may dwell in the house of Jehovah all the days of my life, To gaze upon the pleasantness of Jehovah And to look with appreciation upon his temple.
5 For he will hide me in his shelter on the day of calamity; He will conceal me in the secret place of his tent; High on a rock he will place me.
6 Now my head is high above my enemies who surround me; I will offer sacrifices at his tent with joyful shouting; I will sing praises to Jehovah.
7 Hear me, O Jehovah, when I cry out; Show me favor and answer me.
8 Speaking for you, my heart has said: “Seek to find my face.” Your face, O Jehovah, I will seek to find.
9 Do not hide your face from me. Do not turn your servant away in your anger. You are my helper; Do not forsake me or leave me, my God of salvation.
10 Even if my own father and mother abandon me, Jehovah himself will take me in.
11 Instruct me in your way, O Jehovah, Lead me in the path of uprightness because of my foes.
12 Do not hand me over to my adversaries, For false witnesses have risen up against me, And they threaten me with violence.
13 Where would I be if I did not have faith That I would see Jehovah’s goodness in the land of the living?
14 Hope in Jehovah; Be courageous and strong of heart. Yes, hope in Jehovah.
Of David. 28 To you I keep calling, O Jehovah my Rock; Do not turn a deaf ear to me. If you keep silent toward me, I will become like those going down to the pit.
2 Hear my pleas when I cry to you for help As I lift up my hands toward the innermost room of your sanctuary.
3 Do not drag me away with the wicked, with those practicing what is hurtful, Those who are speaking words of peace with their fellow man while evil is in their hearts.
4 Pay them back for their deeds, According to their evil practices. Repay them for the work of their hands, According to what they have done.
5 For they pay no attention to the activities of Jehovah, Nor to the work of his hands. He will tear them down and not build them up.
6 May Jehovah be praised, For he has heard my pleas for help.
7 Jehovah is my strength and my shield; In him my heart trusts. I have received his help, and my heart rejoices, So I will praise him with my song.
8 Jehovah is a strength for his people; He is a stronghold, bringing grand salvation to his anointed one.
9 Save your people, and bless your inheritance. Shepherd them and carry them in your arms forever.
A melody of David. 29 Give Jehovah his due, you sons of mighty ones, Give Jehovah his due for his glory and strength.
2 Give Jehovah the glory due his name. Bow down to Jehovah in holy adornment.
3 The voice of Jehovah is heard over the waters; The glorious God thunders. Jehovah is over many waters.
4 The voice of Jehovah is powerful; The voice of Jehovah is splendid.
5 The voice of Jehovah is breaking the cedars; Yes, Jehovah shatters the cedars of Lebʹa·non.
6 He makes Lebʹa·non skip like a calf, And Sirʹi·on like a young wild bull.
7 The voice of Jehovah strikes with flames of fire;
8 The voice of Jehovah makes the wilderness shudder; Jehovah makes the wilderness of Kaʹdesh shudder.
9 The voice of Jehovah makes the deer shudder and give birth And strips bare the forests. And all in his temple say: “Glory!”
10 Jehovah sits enthroned above the flooding waters; Jehovah sits enthroned as King forever.
11 Jehovah will give strength to his people. Jehovah will bless his people with peace.
A melody. A song of inauguration of the house. Of David. 30 I will exalt you, O Jehovah, for you have lifted me up; You did not let my enemies rejoice over me.
2 O Jehovah my God, I cried to you for help, and you healed me.
3 O Jehovah, you have lifted me up from the Grave. You kept me alive; you spared me from sinking into the pit.
4 Sing praises to Jehovah, you his loyal ones, Give thanks to his holy name;
5 Because being under his anger is only for a moment, But being in his favor is for a lifetime. Weeping may come in the evening, but in the morning, there is a joyful cry.
6 When I was untroubled, I said: “I will never be shaken.”
7 O Jehovah, while I was in your favor, you made me as strong as a mountain. But when you hid your face, I became terrified.
8 To you, O Jehovah, I kept calling; And to Jehovah, I kept pleading for favor.
9 What profit is there in my death, in my going down to the pit? Will the dust praise you? Will it tell of your faithfulness?
10 Hear, O Jehovah, and show me favor. O Jehovah, become my helper.
11 You have changed my mourning into dancing; You have removed my sackcloth, and you clothe me with rejoicing,
12 So that I may sing your praise and not keep silent. O Jehovah my God, I will praise you forever.
To the director. A melody of David. 31 In you, O Jehovah, I have taken refuge. May I never be put to shame. Rescue me because of your righteousness.
2 Incline your ear to me. Come quickly to my rescue. Become for me a mountain stronghold, A fortified place to save me.
3 For you are my crag and my stronghold; For the sake of your name, you will lead me and guide me.
4 You will free me from the net that they have secretly laid for me, For you are my fortress.
5 Into your hand I entrust my spirit. You have redeemed me, O Jehovah, the God of truth.
6 I hate those who are devoted to worthless, vain idols, But as for me, I trust in Jehovah.
7 I will rejoice greatly in your loyal love, For you have seen my affliction; You are aware of my deep distress.
8 You have not handed me over to the enemy, But you make me stand in a place of safety.
9 Show me favor, O Jehovah, for I am in distress. Anguish has made my eyes weak, my whole body as well.
10 My life is consumed with grief And my years with groaning. My strength is waning because of my error; My bones grow weak.
11 I am scorned by all my adversaries, Especially my neighbors. And I am dreaded by my acquaintances; When they see me in public, they flee from me.
12 I am put out of their heart and forgotten, as if I were dead; I am like a broken jar.
13 I have heard many evil rumors; Terror surrounds me. When they gather together as one against me, They scheme to take away my life.
14 But I trust in you, O Jehovah. I declare: “You are my God.”
15 My days are in your hand. Rescue me from the hand of my enemies and from those persecuting me.
16 Make your face shine upon your servant. Save me by your loyal love.
17 O Jehovah, may I not be put to shame when I call on you. May the wicked be put to shame; May they be silenced in the Grave.
18 May lying lips become speechless, Lips that speak arrogantly against the righteous, with haughtiness and contempt.
19 How abundant your goodness is! You have stored it up for those who fear you, And you have shown it before all men, in behalf of those taking refuge in you.
20 You will conceal them in the secret place of your presence From the schemes of men; You will hide them in your shelter From malicious attacks.
21 May Jehovah be praised, For in a wonderful way, he has shown his loyal love to me in a besieged city.
22 As for me, I panicked and said: “I will perish from before you.” But you heard my pleas for help when I cried out to you.
23 Love Jehovah, all you who are loyal to him! Jehovah protects the faithful, But he repays exceedingly anyone showing haughtiness.
24 Be courageous, and may your heart be strong, All you who are waiting for Jehovah.
Of David. Masʹkil. 32 Happy is the one whose transgression is pardoned, whose sin is covered.
2 Happy is the man whom Jehovah does not charge with guilt, In whose spirit there is no deceit.
3 When I kept silent, my bones wasted away because of my groaning all day long.
4 For day and night your hand was heavy upon me. My strength evaporated like water in the dry summer heat. (Selah)
5 Finally I confessed my sin to you; I did not cover my error. I said: “I will confess my transgressions to Jehovah.” And you pardoned the error of my sins. (Selah)
6 This is why every loyal one will pray to you While you may yet be found. Then even the floodwaters will not reach him.
7 You are a hiding place for me; You will safeguard me from distress. You will surround me with joyful shouts of deliverance. (Selah)
8 “I will give you insight and instruct you in the way you should go. I will give you advice with my eye upon you.
9 Do not become like a horse or a mule, without understanding, Whose spiritedness must be controlled with a bridle or a halter Before it will come near to you.”
10 Many are the pains of the wicked; But the one trusting in Jehovah is surrounded by His loyal love.
11 Rejoice in Jehovah and be joyful, you righteous ones; Shout joyfully, all you who are upright in heart.
33 Shout joyfully, you righteous ones, because of Jehovah. It is fitting for the upright to praise him.
2 Give thanks to Jehovah with the harp; Sing praises to him with a ten-stringed instrument.
3 Sing to him a new song; Play skillfully on the strings, along with shouts of joy.
4 For the word of Jehovah is upright, And everything he does is trustworthy.
5 He loves righteousness and justice. The earth is filled with Jehovah’s loyal love.
6 By the word of Jehovah the heavens were made, And by the spirit of his mouth everything in them.
7 He gathers the seawaters like a dam; He puts the surging waters in storehouses.
8 Let the whole earth fear Jehovah. Let the inhabitants of the productive land be in awe of him.
9 For he spoke, and it came to be; He commanded, and it stood firm.
10 Jehovah has frustrated the schemes of the nations; He has thwarted the plans of the peoples.
11 But the decisions of Jehovah will stand forever; The thoughts of his heart are from generation to generation.
12 Happy is the nation whose God is Jehovah, The people he has chosen as his own possession.
13 Jehovah looks down from heaven; He sees all the sons of men.
14 From his place of residence, He gazes on the inhabitants of the earth.
15 He is the one forming the hearts of all; He examines all their works.
16 No king is saved by a large army; A mighty man is not saved by his great power.
17 The horse is a false hope for salvation; Its great strength does not ensure escape.
18 Look! The eye of Jehovah watches over those fearing him, Those waiting for his loyal love,
19 To rescue them from death And to keep them alive during famine.
20 We are in expectation of Jehovah. He is our helper and our shield.
21 Our hearts rejoice in him, For we trust in his holy name.
22 May your loyal love rest upon us, O Jehovah, While we keep waiting for you.
Of David, when he disguised his sanity before A·bimʹe·lech, who drove him away, and he left.  34 I will praise Jehovah at all times; His praise will be on my lips constantly.
2 I will boast in Jehovah; The meek will hear and rejoice.
3 Magnify Jehovah along with me; Let us exalt his name together.
4 I inquired of Jehovah, and he answered me. He rescued me from all my fears.
5 Those who looked to him became radiant; Their faces could not be put to shame.
6 This lowly one called, and Jehovah heard. He saved him from all his distresses.
7 The angel of Jehovah camps all around those fearing Him, And he rescues them.
8 Taste and see that Jehovah is good; Happy is the man who takes refuge in him.
9 Fear Jehovah, all you his holy ones, For those who fear him lack nothing.
10 Even strong young lions have been reduced to hunger, But those seeking Jehovah will lack nothing good.
11 Come, my sons, listen to me; I will teach you the fear of Jehovah.
12 Who among you takes pleasure in life And would love to see many good days?
13 Then guard your tongue from what is bad, Your lips from speaking deception.
14 Turn away from what is bad and do what is good; Seek peace and pursue it.
15 The eyes of Jehovah are on the righteous, And his ears listen to their cry for help.
16 But the face of Jehovah is against those doing what is bad, To erase all memory of them from the earth.
17 They cried out, and Jehovah heard; He rescued them from all their distresses.
18 Jehovah is close to the brokenhearted; He saves those who are crushed in spirit.
19 Many are the hardships of the righteous one, But Jehovah rescues him from them all.
20 He is guarding all his bones; Not one of them has been broken.
21 Disaster will put the wicked to death; Those hating the righteous will be found guilty.
22 Jehovah is redeeming the life of his servants; None of those taking refuge in him will be found guilty.
Of David. 35 O Jehovah, defend my case against my opposers; Fight against those who fight against me.
2 Take up your buckler and large shield, And rise up to my defense.
3 Lift up your spear and battle-ax against my pursuers. Say to me: “I am your salvation.”
4 May those who are hunting for my life be put to shame and humiliated. May those who are plotting to destroy me retreat in disgrace.
5 May they become like chaff in the wind; May Jehovah’s angel drive them away.
6 May their path be dark and slippery As Jehovah’s angel pursues them.
7 For without cause they have hidden a net to trap me; Without cause they have dug a pit for me.
8 May disaster come upon him by surprise; May the net that he hid catch him; May he fall into it and be destroyed.
9 But I will rejoice in Jehovah; I will be joyful in his acts of salvation.
10 All my bones will say: “O Jehovah, who is like you? You rescue the helpless from those who are stronger, The helpless and the poor from those who rob them.”
11 Malicious witnesses come forward, Asking me things I know nothing about.
12 They repay me with bad for good, Making me feel bereaved.
13 But when they were ill, I clothed myself with sackcloth; I afflicted myself by fasting, And when my prayer would return unanswered,
14 I walked about mourning as for a friend or a brother of mine; I bowed down in sorrow, like one mourning for his mother.
15 But when I stumbled, they rejoiced and gathered together; They gathered together to strike me down in ambush; They tore me to pieces and did not keep silent.
16 The ungodly scornfully mock me, They grind their teeth against me.
17 O Jehovah, how long will you just look on? Rescue me from their attacks, My precious life from the young lions.
18 Then I will give thanks to you in the great congregation; I will praise you among the throngs of people.
19 Do not let those who for no reason are my enemies gloat over me; Do not let those hating me without cause wink their eyes maliciously.
20 For they do not speak words of peace, But they deceptively scheme against the peaceful ones of the land.
21 They open their mouth wide to accuse me, Saying: “Aha! Aha! Our eyes have seen it.”
22 You have seen this, O Jehovah. Do not remain silent. O Jehovah, do not stay far from me.
23 Awake and rise to my defense, My God, Jehovah, defend me in my legal case.
24 Judge me according to your righteousness, O Jehovah my God; Do not let them gloat over me.
25 May they never say to themselves: “Aha! We got what we wanted.” May they never say: “We have swallowed him up.”
26 Let all of them be put to shame and disgraced, Those who gloat over my calamity. Let those who exalt themselves over me be clothed with shame and humiliation.
27 But let those who take pleasure in my righteousness shout joyfully; May they constantly say: “May Jehovah be magnified, who takes pleasure in the peace of his servant.”
28 Then my tongue will recount your righteousness And praise you all day long.
To the director. Of Jehovah’s servant, David. 36 Transgression speaks to the wicked one deep within his heart; There is no fear of God before his eyes.
2 For in his own eyes he flatters himself too much To detect and hate his error.
3 The words of his mouth are hurtful and deceptive; He shows no insight for doing what is good.
4 He plots hurtful schemes even on his bed. He is set on a path that is not good; He does not reject what is bad.
5 O Jehovah, your loyal love reaches to the heavens, Your faithfulness up to the clouds.
6 Your righteousness is like majestic mountains; Your judgments are like vast, deep waters. Man and beast you preserve, O Jehovah.
7 How precious your loyal love is, O God! In the shadow of your wings, The sons of men take refuge.
8 They drink their fill of the rich bounty of your house, And you cause them to drink of the torrent of your delights.
9 With you is the source of life; By your light we can see light.
10 Continue showing your loyal love to those who know you, And your righteousness, to the upright in heart.
11 Do not let the foot of the haughty tread on me Or the hand of the wicked drive me away.
12 There the wrongdoers have fallen; They have been knocked down and cannot get up.
Of David.  37 Do not be upset because of evil men Or envious of wrongdoers.
2 They will quickly wither like grass And shrivel like green new grass.
3 Trust in Jehovah and do what is good; Reside in the earth, and act with faithfulness.
4 Find exquisite delight in Jehovah, And he will grant you the desires of your heart.
5 Commit your way to Jehovah; Rely on him, and he will act in your behalf.
6 He will make your righteousness shine like daybreak, And your justice like the midday sun.
7 Keep silent before Jehovah And wait expectantly for him. Do not be upset by the man Who succeeds in carrying out his schemes.
8 Let go of anger and abandon rage; Do not become upset and turn to doing evil.
9 For evil men will be done away with, But those hoping in Jehovah will possess the earth.
10 Just a little while longer, and the wicked will be no more; You will look at where they were, And they will not be there.
11 But the meek will possess the earth, And they will find exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.
12 The wicked man plots against the righteous; He grinds his teeth at him.
13 But Jehovah will laugh at him, For He knows that his day will come.
14 The wicked draw their swords and bend their bows To bring down the oppressed and the poor, To slaughter those whose way is upright.
15 But their sword will pierce their own heart; Their bows will be broken.
16 Better is the little of the righteous one Than the abundance of many wicked ones.
17 For the arms of the wicked will be broken, But Jehovah will support the righteous.
18 Jehovah is aware of what the blameless go through, And their inheritance will last forever.
19 They will not be put to shame in the time of disaster; In the time of famine they will have plenty.
20 But the wicked will perish; The enemies of Jehovah will vanish like glorious pastures; They will vanish like smoke.
21 The wicked one borrows and does not repay, But the righteous one is generous and giving.
22 Those blessed by Him will possess the earth, But those cursed by Him will be done away with.
23 Jehovah guides the steps of a man When He finds pleasure in his way.
24 Although he may fall, he will not be hurled down, For Jehovah supports him by the hand.
25 I was once young and now I am old, But I have not seen anyone righteous abandoned, Nor his children looking for bread.
26 He always lends freely, And his children are in line for a blessing.
27 Turn away from bad and do what is good, And you will remain forever.
28 For Jehovah loves justice, And he will not abandon his loyal ones.  They will always be guarded; But the descendants of the wicked will be done away with.
29 The righteous will possess the earth, And they will live forever on it.
30 The mouth of the righteous one imparts wisdom, And his tongue speaks about justice.
31 The law of his God is in his heart; His steps will not falter.
32 The wicked watches the righteous, Seeking to put him to death.
33 But Jehovah will not abandon him to the hand of that one Or find him guilty when he is judged.
34 Hope in Jehovah and follow his way, And he will exalt you to take possession of the earth. When the wicked are done away with, you will see it.
35 I have seen the ruthless, evil man Spreading out like a luxuriant tree in its native soil.
36 But he suddenly passed away and was gone; I kept searching for him, and he could not be found.
37 Take note of the blameless one, And keep the upright one in sight, For the future of that man will be peaceful.
38 But all the transgressors will be destroyed; The future of wicked people will be cut off.
39 The salvation of the righteous is from Jehovah; He is their fortress in the time of distress.
40 Jehovah will help them and rescue them. He will rescue them from the wicked and save them, Because they take refuge in him.
A melody of David, to serve as a reminder. 38 O Jehovah, do not reprove me in your anger, Nor correct me in your wrath.
2 For your arrows have pierced deep into me, And your hand presses down on me.
3 My whole body is sick because of your indignation. There is no peace within my bones because of my sin.
4 For my errors loom over my head; Like a heavy burden, they are too much for me to bear.
5 My wounds stink and fester Because of my foolishness.
6 I am distressed and extremely downcast; I walk around sad all day long.
7 There is a burning within me; My whole body is sick.
8 I have grown numb and become completely crushed; My anguished heart makes me groan aloud.
9 O Jehovah, all my desires are before you, And my sighing is not hidden from you.
10 My heart pounds, my strength is gone, And the light of my eyes has left me.
11 My friends and my companions avoid me because of my plague, And my close acquaintances keep their distance.
12 Those seeking my life set traps; Those trying to harm me speak of ruin; They mutter deception all day long.
13 But like someone deaf, I would not listen; Like someone speechless, I would not open my mouth.
14 I have become like a man who cannot hear, Whose mouth has nothing to say in defense.
15 For on you, O Jehovah, I waited, And you answered me, O Jehovah my God.
16 For I said: “May they not gloat over me Or exalt themselves over me if my foot slips.”
17 For I was ready to collapse, And my pain was always with me.
18 I confessed my error; I was troubled by my sin.
19 But my enemies are vigorous and mighty, Those hating me for no reason have become numerous.
20 They repaid me with bad for good; They were resisting me for pursuing what is good.
21 Do not abandon me, O Jehovah. O God, do not remain far away from me.
22 Do hurry to help me, O Jehovah, my salvation.
To the director; of Je·duʹthun. A melody of David. 39 I said: “I will guard my step To avoid sinning with my tongue. I will guard my mouth with a muzzle As long as anyone wicked is in my presence.”
2 I was speechless and silent; I kept quiet even about what is good, But my pain was intense.
3 My heart smoldered inside me. As I pondered, the fire kept burning. Then my tongue spoke:
4 “O Jehovah, help me to know what my end will be, And the measure of my days, So that I may know how short my life is.
5 Indeed, you have made my days just a few; And my life span is as nothing before you. Surely every man, though he seems secure, is nothing but a mere breath. (Selah)
6 Surely every man walks about like a shadow. He rushes around for nothing. He piles up wealth, not knowing who will enjoy it.
7 What, then, can I hope for, O Jehovah? You are my only hope.
8 Save me from all my transgressions. Do not let the foolish one make me an object of contempt.
9 I remained speechless; I could not open my mouth, Because this was your doing.
10 Remove your plague from me. I am worn down because your hand strikes me.
11 You correct man with punishment for his error; You consume the things he treasures just as a moth does. Surely every man is but a mere breath. (Selah)
12 Hear my prayer, O Jehovah, Listen to my cry for help. Do not ignore my tears. For I am but a foreign resident to you, A traveler passing through, just like all my forefathers.
13 Turn your harsh gaze away from me so that I may cheer up Before I pass away and I am gone.”
To the director. Of David. A melody. 40 I earnestly hoped in Jehovah, And he inclined his ear to me and heard my cry for help.
2 He brought me up out of a roaring pit, Out of the slimy mire. And he set my feet upon a crag; He made my footing secure.
3 Then he put a new song in my mouth, Praise to our God. Many will look on in awe And put their trust in Jehovah.
4 Happy is the man who trusts in Jehovah And who does not look to the defiant or to those who are false.
5 How many things you have done, O Jehovah my God, Your wonderful works and your thoughts toward us. None can compare to you; If I were to try to tell and speak of them, They would be too numerous to recount!
6 Sacrifice and offering you did not desire, But you opened up my ears to hear. You did not ask for burnt offerings and sin offerings.
7 Then I said: “Look, I have come. In the scroll it is written about me.
8 To do your will, O my God, is my delight, And your law is deep within me.
9 I proclaim the good news of righteousness in the great congregation. Look! I do not restrain my lips, O Jehovah, as you well know.
10 I do not cover over your righteousness in my heart. I declare your faithfulness and salvation. I do not hide your loyal love and your truth in the great congregation.”
11 O Jehovah, do not withhold your mercy from me. May your loyal love and your truth constantly safeguard me.
12 The calamities surrounding me are too many to count. So many of my errors overwhelm me that I cannot see my way; They are more numerous than the hairs of my head, And I have lost heart.
13 Please be willing, O Jehovah, to save me. O Jehovah, hurry to help me.
14 May all those seeking to take my life Be put to shame and disgraced. May those who delight in my calamity Retreat in humiliation.
15 May those who are saying to me: “Aha! Aha!” Be appalled because of their own shame.
16 But let those seeking you Exult and rejoice in you. May those who love your acts of salvation always say: “May Jehovah be magnified.”
17 But I am helpless and poor; May Jehovah pay attention to me. You are my helper and my rescuer; My God, do not delay.
To the director. A melody of David. 41 Happy is anyone who shows consideration to the lowly one; Jehovah will rescue him in the day of calamity.
2 Jehovah will guard him and keep him alive. He will be pronounced happy in the earth; You will never turn him over to the will of his enemies.
3 Jehovah will sustain him on his sickbed; During his sickness you will completely change his bed.
4 For I said: “O Jehovah, show me favor. Heal me, for I have sinned against you.”
5 But my enemies speak evil about me: “When will he die and his name perish?”
6 If one of them comes to see me, his heart speaks falsely. He gathers something harmful to say; Then he goes out and spreads it abroad.
7 All those who hate me whisper to one another; They are scheming something bad against me:
8 “A dreadful thing has overtaken him; Now that he is down, he will not rise again.”
9 Even the man at peace with me, one whom I trusted, Who was eating my bread, has lifted his heel against me.
10 But you, O Jehovah, show me favor and raise me up, So that I may repay them.
11 By this I will know that you are pleased with me: When my enemy cannot shout in triumph over me.
12 As for me, you uphold me because of my integrity; You will keep me in your presence forever.
13 May Jehovah, the God of Israel, be praised Throughout all eternity. Amen and Amen.
BOOK TWO (Psalms 42-72) To the director. Masʹkil of the sons of Korʹah. 42 As a deer that longs for streams of water, So I long for you, O God.
2 I do thirst for God, for the living God. When may I come and appear before God?
3 My tears are my food day and night; All day long people taunt me: “Where is your God?”
4 These things I remember, and I pour out my soul, For I once walked along with the multitude; I used to walk solemnly before them to the house of God, With sounds of rejoicing and thanksgiving, Those of a crowd celebrating a festival.
5 Why am I in despair? Why is this turmoil within me? Wait for God, For I will yet praise him as my Grand Savior.
6 My God, I am in despair. That is why I remember you, From the land of Jordan and the peaks of Herʹmon, From Mount Mi·zarʹ.
7 Deep waters call to deep waters At the sound of your waterfalls. All your surging waves have overwhelmed me.
8 By day Jehovah will grant me his loyal love, And by night his song will be with me—a prayer to the God of my life.
9 I will say to God, my crag: “Why have you forgotten me? Why should I walk about sad because of the oppression by my enemy?”
10 With murderous hostility my enemies taunt me; All day long they taunt me: “Where is your God?”
11 Why am I in despair? Why is this turmoil within me? Wait for God, For I will yet praise him as my Grand Savior and my God.
43 Judge me, O God, Defend my legal case against a disloyal nation. Rescue me from the man of deception and unrighteousness.
2 For you are my God, my fortress. Why have you cast me off? Why must I walk about sad because of the oppression by my enemy?
3 Send out your light and your truth. May these lead me; May they guide me to your holy mountain and to your grand tabernacle.
4 Then I will come to the altar of God, To God, my exceeding joy. And I will praise you with the harp, O God, my God.
5 Why am I in despair? Why is this turmoil within me? Wait for God, For I will yet praise him as my Grand Savior and my God.
To the director. Of the sons of Korʹah. Masʹkil. 44 O God, we have heard with our own ears, Our forefathers have recounted to us, The deeds you accomplished in their days, In the days of long ago.
2 With your hand you drove away nations And settled our forefathers there. You crushed nations and drove them out.
3 It was not by their own sword that they took possession of the land, And their own arm did not bring them victory. Rather, it was by your right hand and your arm and the light of your face, For you took pleasure in them.
4 You are my King, O God; Command complete victory for Jacob.
5 By your power we will drive back our adversaries; In your name we will trample down those who rise up against us.
6 For I do not trust in my bow, And my sword cannot save me.
7 It was you who saved us from our adversaries, You who humiliated those who hate us.
8 To God we will offer praise all day long, And we will give thanks to your name forever. (Selah)
9 But now you have cast us off and humiliated us, And you do not go out with our armies.
10 You keep making us retreat from our adversary; Those who hate us take whatever they want.
11 You hand us over to be devoured like sheep; You have scattered us among the nations.
12 You sell your people for next to nothing; You make no profit from the sale.
13 You make us a reproach to our neighbors, An object of ridicule and jeering to those all around us.
14 You make us an object of scorn among the nations, Something for the peoples to shake their heads at.
15 I feel humiliated all day long, And I am overwhelmed by my shame,
16 On account of the sound of their taunts and insults, Because of our enemy who is taking revenge.
17 All of this has come upon us, yet we have not forgotten you, And we have not violated your covenant.
18 Our heart has not deviated; Our footsteps do not stray from your path.
19 But you have crushed us where the jackals dwell; You have covered us with deep shadow.
20 If we have forgotten the name of our God Or if we spread out our hands in prayer to a foreign god,
21 Will not God discover this? He is aware of the secrets of the heart.
22 For your sake we are being put to death all day long; We have been accounted as sheep for slaughtering.
23 Rouse yourself. Why do you keep sleeping, O Jehovah? Awake! Do not keep casting us off forever.
24 Why do you hide your face? Why do you forget our affliction and our oppression?
25 For we have been brought down to the dust; Our bodies are pressed to the ground.
26 Rise up as our helper! Rescue us because of your loyal love.
To the director; set to “The Lilies.” Of the sons of Korʹah. Masʹkil. A song of love. 45 My heart is stirred by something good. I say: “My song is about a king.” May my tongue be the stylus of a skilled copyist.
2 You are the most handsome of the sons of men. Gracious speech flows from your lips. That is why God has blessed you forever.
3 Strap your sword on your side, O mighty one, In your dignity and your splendor.
4 And in your splendor go on to victory; Ride in the cause of truth and humility and righteousness, And your right hand will accomplish awe-inspiring things.
5 Your arrows are sharp, making peoples fall before you; They pierce the hearts of the king’s enemies.
6 God is your throne forever and ever; The scepter of your kingdom is a scepter of uprightness.
7 You loved righteousness, and you hated wickedness. That is why God, your God, has anointed you with the oil of exultation more than your companions.
8 All your garments are scented with myrrh and aloeswood and cassia; From the grand ivory palace, stringed instruments make you rejoice.
9 The daughters of kings are among your ladies of honor. The royal consort has taken her stand at your right hand, adorned in gold of Oʹphir.
10 Listen, O daughter, pay attention and incline your ear; Forget your people and your father’s house.
11 And the king will long for your beauty, For he is your lord, So bow down to him.
12 The daughter of Tyre will come with a gift; The wealthiest of men will seek your favor.
13 Inside the palace the king’s daughter is absolutely magnificent; Her clothing is adorned with gold.
14 She will be brought to the king in richly woven garments. The virgin companions following her are brought in before you.
15 They will be brought with rejoicing and joy; They will enter into the king’s palace.
16 Your sons will take the place of your forefathers. You will appoint them as princes in all the earth.
17 I will make your name known throughout all generations to come. That is why peoples will praise you forever and ever.
To the director. Of the sons of Korʹah. According to the Alʹa·moth style. A song. 46 God is our refuge and strength, A help that is readily found in times of distress.
2 That is why we will not fear, though the earth undergoes change, Though the mountains topple into the depths of the sea,
3 Though its waters roar and foam over, Though the mountains rock on account of its turbulence. (Selah)
4 There is a river the streams of which make the city of God rejoice, The holy grand tabernacle of the Most High.
5 God is in the city; it cannot be overthrown. God will come to its aid at the break of dawn.
6 The nations were in an uproar, the kingdoms were overthrown; He raised his voice, and the earth melted.
7 Jehovah of armies is with us; The God of Jacob is our secure refuge. (Selah)
8 Come and witness the activities of Jehovah, How he has done astonishing things on the earth.
9 He is bringing an end to wars throughout the earth. He breaks the bow and shatters the spear; He burns the military wagons with fire.
10 “Give in and know that I am God. I will be exalted among the nations; I will be exalted in the earth.”
11 Jehovah of armies is with us; The God of Jacob is a secure refuge for us. (Selah)
To the director. Of the sons of Korʹah. A melody. 47 All you peoples, clap your hands. Shout in triumph to God with joyful cries.
2 For Jehovah the Most High is awe-inspiring; He is the great King over all the earth.
3 He subdues peoples under us; He puts nations under our feet.
4 He chooses our inheritance for us, The pride of Jacob, whom he loves. (Selah)
5 God has ascended amid joyful shouting; Jehovah, amid the sound of the horn.
6 Sing praises to God, sing praises. Sing praises to our King, sing praises.
7 For God is King of all the earth; Sing praises, and show insight.
8 God has become King over the nations. God sits on his holy throne.
9 The leaders of the peoples have gathered together With the people of the God of Abraham. For the rulers of the earth belong to God. He is highly exalted.
A song. A melody of the sons of Korʹah. 48 Jehovah is great and most worthy of praise In the city of our God, in his holy mountain.
2 Beautiful in its loftiness, the joy of the whole earth, Is Mount Zion in the far north, The city of the Grand King.
3 In her fortified towers, God has made known that he is a secure refuge.
4 For look! kings have assembled; Together they have advanced.
5 When they saw it, they were amazed. They panicked and fled in terror.
6 Trembling seized them there, Anguish like that of a woman giving birth.
7 With an east wind you wreck the ships of Tarʹshish.
8 What we heard about, we have now seen for ourselves In the city of Jehovah of armies, in the city of our God. God will firmly establish it forever. (Selah)
9 We ponder your loyal love, O God, Within your temple.
10 Like your name, O God, your praise Reaches to the ends of the earth. Your right hand is filled with righteousness.
11 May Mount Zion rejoice, May the towns of Judah be joyful, because of your judgments.
12 March around Zion; go all around it; Count its towers.
13 Set your hearts upon its ramparts. Inspect its fortified towers, So that you may tell about it to future generations.
14 For this God is our God forever and ever. He will guide us forevermore.
To the director. Of the sons of Korʹah. A melody. 49 Hear this, all you peoples. Pay attention, all you inhabitants of the world,
2 Both small and great, Rich and poor alike.
3 My own mouth will speak wisdom, And the meditation of my heart will show understanding.
4 I will pay attention to a proverb; I will expound my riddle with the harp.
5 Why should I fear during times of trouble, When I am surrounded by the evil of those trying to overthrow me?
6 Those who are trusting in their wealth And who boast about their great riches,
7 None of them can ever redeem a brother Or give to God a ransom for him,
8 (The ransom price for their life is so precious That it is always beyond their reach);
9 That he should live forever and not see the pit.
10 He sees that even wise people die; The stupid and the unreasoning perish together, And they must leave their wealth to others.
11 Their inner wish is that their houses will last forever, Their tents to generation after generation. They have named their estates after themselves.
12 But man, although honored, will not remain; He is no better than the beasts that perish.
13 This is the way of the stupid ones And of those who follow them, who take pleasure in their empty words. (Selah)
14 They are assigned like sheep to the Grave. Death will shepherd them; The upright will rule over them in the morning. Every trace of them will fade away; The Grave rather than a palace will be their home.
15 But God will redeem me from the power of the Grave, For he will take hold of me. (Selah)
16 Do not be afraid because a man becomes rich, Because the splendor of his house increases,
17 For when he dies he can take nothing with him; His splendor will not go down with him.
18 For during his lifetime he congratulates himself. (People praise you when you prosper.)
19 But he finally joins the generation of his forefathers. They will never again see the light.
20 A man who does not understand this, although honored, Is no better than the beasts that perish.
A melody of Aʹsaph. 50 The God of gods, Jehovah, has spoken; He summons the earth From the rising of the sun until its setting.
2 Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God shines forth.
3 Our God will come and cannot remain silent. Before him is a consuming fire, And a great storm rages all around him.
4 He summons the heavens above and the earth, So as to judge his people:
5 “Gather to me my loyal ones, Those making a covenant with me over sacrifice.”
6 The heavens proclaim his righteousness, For God himself is Judge. (Selah)
7 “Listen, O my people, and I will speak; Israel, I will bear witness against you. I am God, your God.
8 I do not reprove you because of your sacrifices, Nor because of your whole burnt offerings that are constantly before me.
9 I do not need to take a bull from your house, Nor goats from your pens.
10 For every wild animal of the forest is mine, Even the beasts upon a thousand mountains.
11 I know every bird of the mountains; The countless animals of the field are mine.
12 If I were hungry, I would not tell you, For the productive land and everything in it is mine.
13 Will I eat the flesh of bulls And drink the blood of goats?
14 Offer thanksgiving as your sacrifice to God, And pay your vows to the Most High;
15 Call on me in the time of distress. I will rescue you, and you will glorify me.”
16 But God will say to the wicked: “What right do you have to relate my regulations Or to speak about my covenant?
17 For you hate discipline, And you keep turning your back on my words.
18 When you see a thief, you approve of him, And you keep company with adulterers.
19 You use your mouth to spread what is bad, And deception is attached to your tongue.
20 You sit and speak against your own brother; You reveal the faults of your own mother’s son.
21 When you did these things, I remained silent, So you thought that I would be just like you. But now I will reprove you, And I will state my case against you.
22 Please consider this, you who forget God, So that I may not tear you to pieces with no one to rescue you.
23 The one who offers thanksgiving as his sacrifice glorifies me, And as for the one who follows a set course, I will cause him to see salvation by God.”
To the director. A melody of David, when Nathan the prophet came in to him after David had relations with Bath-sheʹba. 51 Show me favor, O God, according to your loyal love. Blot out my transgressions according to your great mercy.
2 Thoroughly wash me from my error, And cleanse me from my sin.
3 For I am well-aware of my transgressions, And my sin is always before me.
4 Against you—you above all—I have sinned; What is bad in your eyes I have done. Therefore, you are righteous when you speak, You are right in your judgment.
5 Look! I was born guilty of error, And my mother conceived me in sin.
6 Look! You find pleasure in truth in the inner person; Teach my innermost self true wisdom.
7 Purify me from my sin with hyssop, so that I will be clean; Wash me, so that I will be whiter than snow.
8 Let me hear sounds of joy and rejoicing, So that the bones you crushed will rejoice.
9 Turn your face away from my sins, And wipe away all my errors.
10 Create in me a pure heart, O God, And put within me a new spirit, a steadfast one.
11 Do not cast me out from your presence; And do not take your holy spirit away from me.
12 Restore to me the joy of your salvation; Stir within me a willingness to obey you.
13 I will teach transgressors your ways, So that sinners will return to you.
14 Save me from bloodguilt, O God, the God of my salvation, So that my tongue may joyfully declare your righteousness.
15 O Jehovah, open my lips, So that my mouth may declare your praise.
16 For you do not want a sacrifice—otherwise I would give it; You do not find delight in a whole burnt offering.
17 The sacrifices pleasing to God are a broken spirit; A heart broken and crushed, O God, you will not reject.
18 In your goodwill do what is good for Zion; Build up the walls of Jerusalem.
19 Then you will take delight in the sacrifices of righteousness, The burnt sacrifices and the whole offerings; Then bulls will be offered up on your altar.
To the director. Masʹkil. Of David, when Doʹeg the Eʹdom·ite came and told Saul that David had come to the house of A·himʹe·lech. 52 Why do you boast about your evil acts, you mighty one? The loyal love of God lasts all day long.
2 Your tongue, as sharp as a razor, Schemes harm and works deceitfully.
3 You love evil more than what is good, Lying more than speaking what is right. (Selah)
4 You love every harmful word, O you deceitful tongue!
5 That is why God will pull you down once and for all; He will snatch you up and tear you away from your tent; He will uproot you from the land of the living. (Selah)
6 The righteous ones will see it and be filled with awe, And they will laugh at him.
7 “Here is a man who did not make God his refuge, But he trusted in his great riches And relied on his own evil plots.”
8 But I will be like a luxuriant olive tree in God’s house; My trust is in God’s loyal love, forever and ever.
9 I will praise you forever because you have taken action; In the presence of your loyal ones, I will hope in your name, for it is good.
To the director; in the style of Maʹha·lath. Masʹkil. Of David. 53 The foolish one says in his heart: “There is no Jehovah.” Their unrighteous actions are corrupt and detestable; No one is doing good.
2 But God looks down from heaven on the sons of men To see whether anyone has insight, whether anyone is seeking Jehovah.
3 They have all turned away; They are all alike corrupt. No one is doing good, Not even one.
4 Do none of the wrongdoers understand? They devour my people as if they were eating bread. They do not call on Jehovah.
5 But they will be filled with great terror, Terror they have never felt before, For God will scatter the bones of those attacking you. You will put them to shame, for Jehovah has rejected them.
6 O that Israel’s salvation may come from Zion! When Jehovah gathers back his captive people, Let Jacob be joyful, let Israel rejoice.
To the director; to be accompanied with stringed instruments. Masʹkil. Of David, when the Ziphʹites came in and said to Saul: “David is hiding among us.” 54 O God, save me by your name, And defend me with your power.
2 O God, hear my prayer; Pay attention to the words of my mouth.
3 For strangers rise up against me, And ruthless men seek my life. They have no regard for God. (Selah)
4 Look! God is my helper; Jehovah is with those supporting me.
5 He will repay my foes with their own evil; In your faithfulness, put an end to them.
6 I will sacrifice to you willingly. I will praise your name, O Jehovah, for it is good.
7 For he saves me from every distress, And I will look in triumph on my enemies.
To the director; to be accompanied with stringed instruments. Masʹkil. Of David. 55 Listen to my prayer, O God, And do not ignore my request for mercy.
2 Do pay attention to me and answer me. My concern makes me restless, And I am distraught
3 Because of what the enemy is saying And the pressure from the wicked one. For they heap trouble upon me, And in anger they harbor animosity against me.
4 My heart is in anguish within me, And the terrors of death overwhelm me.
5 Fear and trembling come upon me, And shuddering grips me.
6 I keep saying: “If only I had wings like a dove! I would fly away and reside in safety.
7 Look! I would flee far away. I would lodge in the wilderness. (Selah)
8 I would hurry to a place of shelter Away from the raging wind, away from the storm.”
9 Confuse them, O Jehovah, and frustrate their plans, For I have seen violence and conflict in the city.
10 Day and night they walk around on its walls; Within it are malice and trouble.
11 Ruin is in its midst; Oppression and deception never depart from its public square.
12 For it is not an enemy who taunts me; Otherwise I could put up with it. It is not a foe who has risen up against me; Otherwise I could conceal myself from him.
13 But it is you, a man like me, My own companion whom I know well.
14 We used to enjoy a warm friendship together; Into the house of God we used to walk along with the multitude.
15 May destruction overtake them! Let them go down alive into the Grave; For evil resides among them and within them.
16 As for me, I will call out to God, And Jehovah will save me.
17 Evening and morning and noontime, I am troubled and I groan, And he hears my voice.
18 He will rescue me and give me peace from those fighting against me, For multitudes come against me.
19 God will hear and respond to them, The one who sits enthroned from of old. (Selah) They will refuse to change, Those who have not feared God.
20 He attacked those at peace with him; He violated his covenant.
21 His words are smoother than butter, But conflict is in his heart. His words are softer than oil, But they are drawn swords.
22 Throw your burden on Jehovah, And he will sustain you. Never will he allow the righteous one to fall.
23 But you, O God, will bring them down to the deepest pit. Those bloodguilty and deceitful men will not live out half their days. But as for me, I will trust in you.
To the director; set to “The Silent Dove That Is Far Away.” Of David. Mikʹtam. When the Phi·lisʹtines captured him in Gath. 56 Show me favor, O God, because mortal man is attacking me. All day long they keep fighting and oppressing me.
2 My foes keep snapping at me all day long; Many arrogantly fight against me.
3 When I am afraid, I put my trust in you.
4 In God—whose word I praise— In God I put my trust; I am not afraid. What can mere man do to me?
5 All day long they hurt my interests; Their only thought is to harm me.
6 They conceal themselves to attack; They watch my every step, Hoping to take away my life.
7 Reject them because of their wickedness. Bring down the nations in your anger, O God.
8 You keep track of my wandering. Do collect my tears in your skin bottle. Are they not recorded in your book?
9 My enemies will retreat on the day that I call for help. Of this I am confident: God is on my side.
10 In God—whose word I praise— In Jehovah—whose word I praise—
11 In God I put my trust; I am not afraid. What can a mere human do to me?
12 I am bound by my vows to you, O God; I will offer you expressions of thanksgiving.
13 For you have rescued me from death And prevented my feet from stumbling, So that I may walk before God in the light of the living.
To the director; set to “Do Not Bring to Ruin.” Of David. Mikʹtam. When he ran away from Saul into the cave. 57 Show me favor, O God, show me favor, For I take refuge in you, And in the shadow of your wings I take refuge until the troubles pass.
2 I call to God the Most High, To the true God, who brings them to an end for me.
3 He will send help from heaven and save me. He will frustrate the one snapping at me. (Selah) God will send his loyal love and his faithfulness.
4 I am surrounded by lions; I must lie among men who want to devour me, Whose teeth are spears and arrows And whose tongue is a sharp sword.
5 Be exalted above the heavens, O God; May your glory be over all the earth.
6 They have prepared a net to ensnare my feet; I am bowed down with distress. They have dug a pit ahead of me, But they fell into it themselves. (Selah)
7 My heart is steadfast, O God, My heart is steadfast. I will sing and make music.
8 Do awake, my glory. Do awake, O stringed instrument; you too, O harp. I will awaken the dawn.
9 I will praise you among the peoples, O Jehovah; I will sing praises to you among the nations.
10 For your loyal love is great, as high as the heavens, And your faithfulness, up to the skies.
11 Be exalted above the heavens, O God; May your glory be over all the earth.
To the director; set to “Do Not Bring to Ruin.” Of David. Mikʹtam. 58 Can you speak about righteousness when you are silent? Can you judge in uprightness, you sons of men?
2 Instead, you devise unrighteousness in your heart, And your hands dispense violence in the land.
3 The wicked go astray from birth; They are wayward, liars from the time they are born.
4 Their venom is like the venom of serpents; They are deaf like the cobra that stops up its ear.
5 It will not listen to the voice of charmers, No matter how skillful their spells.
6 O God, knock the teeth out of their mouth! Break the jaws of these lions, O Jehovah!
7 May they disappear like waters that drain away. May He bend his bow and make them fall by his arrows.
8 May they be like a snail that melts away as it moves along; Like a woman’s stillborn child who never sees the sun.
9 Before your cooking pots feel the heat of the bramble, He will sweep away both the moist and the burning twig, as in a storm wind.
10 The righteous one will rejoice because he has seen the vengeance; His feet will be drenched with the blood of the wicked.
11 Then men will say: “Surely there is a reward for the righteous. There is indeed a God who judges in the earth.”
To the director; set to “Do Not Bring to Ruin.” Of David. Mikʹtam. When Saul sent men to watch David’s house to put him to death. 59 Rescue me from my enemies, O my God; Protect me from those rising up against me.
2 Rescue me from those who act wickedly, And save me from violent men.
3 Look! They wait to ambush me; Strong men attack me But not because I have revolted or sinned, O Jehovah.
4 Though I did no wrong, they run and prepare to attack. Do arise at my calling and see.
5 For you, O Jehovah God of armies, are the God of Israel. Awake to turn your attention to all the nations. Do not show mercy to any malicious traitors. (Selah)
6 They return each evening; They growl like dogs and prowl around the city.
7 Look what pours forth from their mouth; Their lips are like swords, For they say: “Who is listening?”
8 But you, O Jehovah, will laugh at them; You will scoff at all the nations.
9 O my Strength, I will keep watch for you; For God is my secure refuge.
10 The God who shows loyal love to me will come to my aid; God will cause me to look in triumph on my foes.
11 Do not kill them, so that my people may not forget. By your power make them wander about; Cause their downfall, O Jehovah, our shield.
12 For the sin of their mouth, the word of their lips, May they be trapped by their pride, Because of the cursing and deception that they speak.
13 Finish them off in your wrath; Finish them off, so that they are no more; Make them know that God is ruling in Jacob and to the ends of the earth. (Selah)
14 Let them return in the evening; Let them growl like dogs and prowl around the city.
15 Let them wander about for something to eat; Do not let them be satisfied or find a lodging place.
16 But as for me, I will sing about your strength; In the morning I will joyfully tell about your loyal love. For you are my secure refuge And a place for me to flee in my time of distress.
17 O my Strength, to you I will sing praises, For God is my secure refuge, the God who shows loyal love to me.
To the director; set to “The Lily of Reminder.” Mikʹtam. Of David. For teaching. When he fought with Aʹram-na·ha·raʹim and Aʹram-Zoʹbah, and Joʹab returned and struck down 12,000 Eʹdom·ites in the Valley of Salt. 60 O God, you rejected us; you broke through our defenses. You were angry with us; but now accept us back!
2 You caused the earth to quake; you split it open. Repair its breaches, for it is falling.
3 You caused your people to suffer hardship. You made us drink wine that makes us stagger.
4 Give a signal to those fearing you To flee and dodge the bow. (Selah)
5 So that your loved ones may be rescued, Save us with your right hand and answer us.
6 God has spoken in his holiness: “I will exult, I will give out Sheʹchem as an inheritance, And I will measure off the Valley of Sucʹcoth.
7 Gilʹe·ad belongs to me, as does Ma·nasʹseh, And Eʹphra·im is the helmet for my head; Judah is my commander’s staff.
8 Moʹab is my washbasin. Over Eʹdom I will throw my sandal. Over Phi·lisʹti·a I will shout in triumph.”
9 Who will bring me to the besieged city? Who will lead me as far as Eʹdom?
10 Is it not you, O God, who have rejected us, Our God, who no longer goes out with our armies?
11 Help us in our distress, For salvation by humans is worthless.
12 By God we will gain power, And he will trample on our adversaries.
To the director; to be accompanied with stringed instruments. Of David. 61 Hear, O God, my cry for help. Do pay attention to my prayer.
2 From the ends of the earth I will cry out to you When my heart is in despair. Lead me onto a rock that is higher than I am.
3 For you are my refuge, A strong tower that protects me from the enemy.
4 I will be a guest in your tent forever; I will take refuge in the shelter of your wings. (Selah)
5 For you, O God, have heard my vows. You have given me the inheritance belonging to those who fear your name.
6 You will add days to the life of the king, And his years will be from generation to generation.
7 He will sit enthroned forever before God; Grant him loyal love and faithfulness, so that these may safeguard him.
8 Then I will sing praises to your name forever As I pay my vows day after day.
To the director; of Je·duʹthun. A melody of David. 62 Indeed, I wait silently for God. My salvation comes from him.
2 Indeed, he is my rock and my salvation, my secure refuge; I will never be greatly shaken.
3 How long will you assault a man in order to murder him? All of you are as dangerous as a leaning wall, a stone wall ready to collapse.
4 For they consult together to topple him from his high position; They take pleasure in lying. With their mouth they bless, but inside they are cursing. (Selah)
5 Indeed, I wait silently for God Because my hope comes from him.
6 Indeed, he is my rock and my salvation, my secure refuge; I will never be shaken.
7 Upon God depends my salvation and my glory. My strong rock, my refuge, is God.
8 Trust in him at all times, O people. Pour out your hearts before him. God is a refuge for us. (Selah)
9 The sons of men are a mere breath, The sons of mankind are a delusion. When laid together on the scales, they are lighter than a mere breath.
10 Do not trust in extortion Or put false hopes in robbery. If your wealth increases, do not set your heart on it.
11 Once God has spoken, twice I have heard this: That strength belongs to God.
12 Also loyal love is yours, O Jehovah, For you repay each one according to his deeds.
A melody of David, when he was in the wilderness of Judah. 63 O God, you are my God, I keep looking for you. I do thirst for you. I am faint with longing for you In a dry and parched land, where there is no water.
2 So I have looked upon you in the holy place; I have seen your strength and your glory.
3 Because your loyal love is better than life, My own lips will glorify you.
4 Thus I will praise you all my life; In your name I will lift up my hands.
5 I am satisfied with the best and choicest portion, So my mouth will praise you with joy on my lips.
6 I remember you while upon my bed; I meditate on you during the watches of the night.
7 For you are my helper, And I shout joyfully in the shadow of your wings.
8 I cling to you; Your right hand keeps fast hold on me.
9 But those who seek to destroy my life Will descend into the depths of the earth.
10 They will be handed over to the power of the sword; They will become food for jackals.
11 But the king will rejoice in God. Every person swearing by Him will exult, For the mouth of those speaking lies will be silenced.
To the director. A melody of David. 64 Hear my voice, O God, as I plead. Safeguard my life from the dreadfulness of the enemy.
2 Shield me from the secret plots of wicked men, From the crowd of wrongdoers.
3 They sharpen their tongue just like a sword; They aim their cruel words like arrows,
4 To shoot at the innocent from their hiding places; They shoot at him suddenly, without fear.
5 They hold fast to their evil intent; They discuss how to hide their traps. They say: “Who will see them?”
6 They search out new ways of wrongdoing; They secretly devise their shrewd strategy; The thinking within each one’s heart is unfathomable.
7 But God will shoot at them; Suddenly they will be wounded by an arrow.
8 Their own tongue will cause their downfall; All those looking on will shake their head.
9 Then all men will become afraid, And they will proclaim what God has done, And they will have insight into his deeds.
10 The righteous one will rejoice in Jehovah and take refuge in him; All the upright in heart will exult.
To the director. A melody of David. A song. 65 Praise awaits you, O God, in Zion; We will pay our vows to you.
2 O Hearer of prayer, to you people of all sorts will come.
3 My errors have overwhelmed me, But you cover over our transgressions.
4 Happy is the one whom you choose and bring near To reside in your courtyards. We will be satisfied with the goodness of your house, Your holy temple.
5 You will answer us with awe-inspiring deeds of righteousness, O God of our salvation; You are the Confidence of all the ends of the earth And of those distant across the sea.
6 You firmly established the mountains by your power; You are clothed with mightiness.
7 You calm the raging seas, The crash of their waves and the turmoil of the nations.
8 The inhabitants of remote places will be awestruck by your signs; You will cause those from the sunrise to the sunset to shout joyfully.
9 You care for the earth, Making it abundantly fruitful and very rich. The stream from God is full of water; You provide grain for them, For that is how you prepared the earth.
10 You drench its furrows and level off its plowed soil; You soften it with showers of rain; you bless its growth.
11 You crown the year with your goodness; Your tracks overflow with abundance.
12 The pastures of the wilderness keep overflowing, And the hills are clothed with joyfulness.
13 The pastures are covered with flocks, And the valleys are carpeted with grain. They shout in triumph, yes, they sing.
To the director. A song. A melody. 66 Shout in triumph to God, all the earth.
2 Sing praises to his glorious name. Make his praise glorious.
3 Say to God: “How awe-inspiring your works are! Because of your great power, Your enemies will cringe before you.
4 All the earth will bow down to you; They will sing praises to you; They will sing praises to your name.” (Selah)
5 Come and see the works of God. His deeds toward the sons of men are awe-inspiring.
6 He changed the sea into dry land; They crossed the river on foot. There we rejoiced in him.
7 He rules forever by his might. His eyes keep watch on the nations. Those who are stubborn should not exalt themselves. (Selah)
8 Praise our God, you peoples, And let the sound of his praise be heard.
9 He preserves us alive; He does not allow our feet to stumble.
10 For you have examined us, O God; As silver is refined, so you have refined us.
11 You brought us into a hunting net; You put a crushing burden upon us.
12 You allowed mortal man to ride over us; We came through fire and through water; Then you brought us to a place of relief.
13 I will come into your house with whole burnt offerings; I will pay my vows to you
14 That my lips promised And my mouth spoke when I was in distress.
15 I will offer burnt offerings of fattened animals to you With the smoke of sacrificial rams. I will offer bulls along with male goats. (Selah)
16 Come and listen, all you who fear God, And I will tell you what he has done for me.
17 I called to him with my mouth And glorified him with my tongue.
18 If I had harbored anything hurtful in my heart, Jehovah would not have heard me.
19 But God did hear; He paid attention to my prayer.
20 Praise to God, who did not reject my prayer Or withhold his loyal love from me.
To the director; to be accompanied with stringed instruments. A melody. A song. 67 God will show us favor and bless us; He will make his face shine upon us (Selah)
2 So that your way may be known throughout the earth, Your acts of salvation among all the nations.
3 Let peoples praise you, O God; Let all the peoples praise you.
4 Let nations rejoice and shout joyfully, For you will judge the peoples fairly. You will guide the nations of the earth. (Selah)
5 Let peoples praise you, O God; Let all the peoples praise you.
6 The earth will give its produce; God, our God, will bless us.
7 God will bless us, And all the ends of the earth will fear him.
To the director. Of David. A melody. A song. 68 Let God rise up, let his enemies be scattered, And let those who hate him flee from before him.
2 As smoke is driven away, may you drive them away; As wax melts before the fire, So let the wicked perish before God.
3 But let the righteous rejoice; May they be overjoyed before God; May they exult with rejoicing.
4 Sing to God; sing praises to his name. Sing to the One riding through the desert plains. Jah is his name! Rejoice before him!
5 A father of the fatherless and a protector of widows Is God in his holy dwelling.
6 God gives those who are alone a home to dwell in; He leads prisoners out into prosperity. But the stubborn must live in a parched land.
7 O God, when you led your people, When you marched through the desert, (Selah)
8 The earth quaked; Heaven poured down rain because of God; This Siʹnai quaked because of God, the God of Israel.
9 You made it rain in abundance, O God; You reinvigorated your exhausted people.
10 They dwelled in your tent community; In your goodness, you provided for the poor, O God.
11 Jehovah gives the command; The women proclaiming the good news are a large army.
12 The kings of armies flee, they flee! She who remains at home shares in the spoil.
13 Although you men were lying among the campfires, There will be the wings of a dove covered with silver, With pinions of fine gold.
14 When the Almighty One scattered its kings, Snow fell in Zalʹmon.
15 The mountain of Baʹshan is a mountain of God; The mountain of Baʹshan is a mountain of peaks.
16 Why do you look with envy, you mountains of peaks, Toward the mountain that God has chosen as his dwelling? Indeed, Jehovah will reside there forever.
17 The war chariots of God are tens of thousands, thousands upon thousands. Jehovah has come from Siʹnai into the holy place.
18 You ascended on high; You carried away captives; You took gifts in the form of men, Yes, even stubborn ones, to reside among them, O Jah God.
19 May Jehovah be praised, who daily carries our load, The true God of our salvation. (Selah)
20 The true God is for us a God who saves; And Jehovah the Sovereign Lord provides escape from death.
21 Yes, God will smash the heads of his enemies, The hairy crown of the head of anyone who continues in his guilt.
22 Jehovah has said: “I will bring them back from Baʹshan; I will bring them back from the depths of the sea,
23 So that your foot may be awash in blood And the tongue of your dogs may have its portion from the enemies.”
24 They see your processions, O God, The processions of my God, my King, into the holy place.
25 The singers walk in front, the musicians playing stringed instruments after them; In between are the young women playing tambourines.
26 In congregated throngs, praise God; Praise Jehovah, you who are from the Source of Israel.
27 There Benjamin, the youngest, is subduing them, Also the princes of Judah with their noisy crowd, The princes of Zebʹu·lun, the princes of Naphʹta·li.
28 Your God has decreed that you will be strong. Show your strength, O God, you who have acted in our behalf.
29 Because of your temple at Jerusalem, Kings will bring gifts to you.
30 Rebuke the wild beasts of the reeds, The assembly of bulls and their calves, Until the peoples bow down bringing pieces of silver. But he scatters the peoples who delight in war.
31 Bronze articles will be brought out of Egypt; Cush will hasten to offer gifts to God.
32 O kingdoms of the earth, sing to God, Sing praises to Jehovah, (Selah)
33 To the one who rides the ancient heaven of heavens. Look! He thunders with his voice, his mighty voice.
34 Acknowledge God’s strength. His majesty is over Israel, And his strength is in the skies.
35 God is awe-inspiring from his grand sanctuary. He is the God of Israel, Who gives strength and power to the people. Praise to God.
To the director; set to “The Lilies.” Of David. 69 Save me, O God, for the waters threaten my life.
2 I have sunk down into the deep mud, where there is no solid ground. I have come into deep waters, And the rushing stream has swept me away.
3 I am exhausted from calling out; My throat has become hoarse. My eyes have grown weary while waiting for my God.
4 Those hating me without cause Are more numerous than the hairs of my head. Those who would do away with me, My treacherous enemies, have become many. I was forced to hand over what I had not stolen.
5 O God, you are aware of my foolishness, And my guilt is not hidden from you.
6 May those hoping in you not be put to shame because of me, O Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies. May those seeking you not be humiliated because of me, O God of Israel.
7 I suffer reproach on your account; Humiliation covers my face.
8 I have become a stranger to my brothers, A foreigner to the sons of my mother.
9 Zeal for your house has consumed me, And the reproaches of those reproaching you have fallen upon me.
10 When I humbled myself with fasting, I was reproached for it.
11 When I made sackcloth my clothing, I became an object of scorn to them.
12 I am the talk of those sitting in the city gate, And the drunkards make me the subject of their songs.
13 But may my prayer come to you, O Jehovah, at an acceptable time. In your abundant loyal love, O God, Answer me with your sure acts of salvation.
14 Rescue me from the mire; Do not let me sink down. Rescue me from those who hate me And from the deep waters.
15 Do not let the rushing floodwaters sweep me away, Or let the deep swallow me, Or let the well close its mouth over me.
16 Answer me, O Jehovah, for your loyal love is good. According to your abundant mercy turn toward me,
17 And do not hide your face from your servant. Answer me quickly, for I am in distress.
18 Come near to me and rescue me; Redeem me on account of my enemies.
19 You know my reproach and my disgrace and my humiliation. You see all my foes.
20 Reproach has broken my heart, and the wound is incurable. I was hoping for sympathy, but there was none, And for comforters, but I found none.
21 But for food they gave me poison, And for my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.
22 Let their table become a trap for them, And their prosperity, a snare.
23 Let their eyes become darkened so that they cannot see, And make their hips tremble constantly.
24 Pour out upon them your indignation, And may your burning anger overtake them.
25 Let their encampment become desolate; Let there be no inhabitant in their tents.
26 For they pursue the one whom you struck, And they keep recounting the pains of those you wounded.
27 Add more guilt to their guilt, And may they have no share in your righteousness.
28 Let them be erased from the book of the living, And may they not be enrolled among the righteous.
29 But I am afflicted and in pain. May your saving power, O God, protect me.
30 I will sing praises to the name of God, And I will magnify him with thanksgiving.
31 This will please Jehovah more than a bull, More than a young bull with horns and hooves.
32 The meek will see it and rejoice. You who are seeking God, may your hearts revive.
33 For Jehovah is listening to the poor, And he will not despise his captive people.
34 Let heaven and earth praise him, The seas and everything that moves in them.
35 For God will save Zion And will rebuild the cities of Judah, And they will dwell there and possess it.
36 The descendants of his servants will inherit it, And those who love his name will reside in it.
To the director. Of David, to serve as a reminder. 70 O God, save me; O Jehovah, hurry to help me.
2 May those seeking to take my life Be put to shame and disgraced. May those who delight in my calamity Retreat in humiliation.
3 May those who are saying: “Aha! Aha!” Be driven back in shame.
4 But let those who are seeking you Exult and rejoice in you. May those who love your acts of salvation always say: “May God be magnified!”
5 But I am helpless and poor; O God, act quickly in my behalf. You are my helper and my rescuer; O Jehovah, do not delay.
71 In you, O Jehovah, I have taken refuge. May I never be put to shame.
2 In your righteousness save me and rescue me. Incline your ear to me and save me.
3 Become for me a rock fortress Where I can always enter. Give the command to save me, For you are my crag and my stronghold.
4 O my God, rescue me from the hand of the wicked, From the grasp of the unjust oppressor.
5 For you are my hope, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah; I have trusted in you since my youth.
6 I have depended on you from birth; It was you who took me from my mother’s womb. I praise you constantly.
7 I have become like a miracle to many, But you are my strong refuge.
8 My mouth is filled with your praise; All day long I tell about your splendor.
9 Do not cast me off in my old age; Do not abandon me when my strength fails.
10 My enemies speak against me, And those seeking to take my life conspire together,
11 Saying: “God has abandoned him. Chase after him and seize him, for there is no one to save him.”
12 O God, do not remain far away from me. O my God, hurry to help me.
13 May those who are resisting me Be put to shame and perish. May those seeking my calamity Be covered with disgrace and humiliation.
14 But as for me, I will continue to wait; I will add to your praise.
15 My mouth will recount your righteousness, All day long your acts of salvation, Though they are too many for me to grasp.
16 I will come and tell about your mighty acts, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah; I will mention your righteousness, yours alone.
17 O God, you have taught me from my youth, And until now I keep declaring your wonderful works.
18 Even when I am old and gray, O God, do not abandon me. Let me tell the next generation about your power And about your mightiness to all those who are to come.
19 Your righteousness, O God, reaches to the heights; You have done great things; O God, who is like you?
20 Though you have made me experience much distress and calamity, Revive me again; Bring me up from the depths of the earth.
21 May you increase my greatness And surround and comfort me.
22 Then I will praise you on a stringed instrument Because of your faithfulness, O my God. I will sing your praises with the harp, O Holy One of Israel.
23 My lips will shout joyfully as I sing praises to you, For you have saved my life.
24 My tongue will speak about your righteousness all day long, For those seeking my destruction will be ashamed and disgraced.
Regarding Solomon. 72 O God, give your judgments to the king, And endow the son of the king with your righteousness.
2 May he plead the cause of your people with righteousness, And of your lowly ones with justice.
3 May the mountains bring peace to the people, And may the hills bring righteousness.
4 Let him defend the lowly among the people, Let him save the sons of the poor, And let him crush the defrauder.
5 They will fear you as long as there is a sun And as long as the moon remains, For generation after generation.
6 He will be like the rain that falls on the mown grass, Like showers of rain that water the earth.
7 In his days the righteous will flourish, And peace will abound until the moon is no more.
8 He will have subjects from sea to sea And from the River to the ends of the earth.
9 The desert dwellers will bow down before him, And his enemies will lick the dust.
10 The kings of Tarʹshish and of the islands will pay tribute. The kings of Sheʹba and of Seʹba will present gifts.
11 All the kings will bow down before him, And all the nations will serve him.
12 For he will rescue the poor who cry for help, Also the lowly one and whoever has no helper.
13 He will have pity on the lowly and the poor, And the lives of the poor he will save.
14 From oppression and from violence he will rescue them, And their blood will be precious in his eyes.
15 May he live and be given the gold of Sheʹba. May prayers be said for him continually, And may he be blessed all day long.
16 There will be an abundance of grain on the earth; On the top of the mountains it will overflow. His fruit will flourish as in Lebʹa·non, And in the cities people will blossom like the vegetation of the earth.
17 May his name endure forever, And may it prosper as long as the sun. May people obtain a blessing for themselves by means of him; May all nations pronounce him happy.
18 May Jehovah God be praised, Israel’s God, Who alone does wonderful things.
19 May his glorious name be praised forever, And may his glory fill the whole earth. Amen and Amen.
20 This completes the prayers of David, the son of Jesʹse.
BOOK THREE (Psalms 73-89) A melody of Aʹsaph. 73 God is truly good to Israel, to those pure in heart.
2 As for me, my feet had almost strayed; My steps had nearly slipped.
3 For I became envious of the arrogant When I would see the peace of the wicked.
4 For they have no pain in their death; Their bodies are healthy.
5 They are not troubled like other humans, Nor do they suffer like other men.
6 Therefore, haughtiness is their necklace; Violence clothes them as a garment.
7 Their prosperity makes their eyes bulge; They have exceeded the imaginations of the heart.
8 They scoff and say evil things. They arrogantly threaten oppression.
9 They speak as if they were as high as heaven, And their tongues swagger about in the earth.
10 So his people turn aside to them, And they drink from their abundant water.
11 They say: “How does God know? Does the Most High really have knowledge?”
12 Yes, these are the wicked, who always have it easy. They keep increasing their wealth.
13 Surely in vain I have kept my heart pure And washed my hands in innocence.
14 And I was troubled all day long; Every morning I was chastised.
15 But if I had said these things, I would have betrayed your people.
16 When I tried to understand it, It was troubling to me
17 Until I entered the grand sanctuary of God, And I discerned their future.
18 Surely you place them on slippery ground. You make them fall to their ruin.
19 How suddenly they are devastated! How sudden is their finish as they come to a terrible end!
20 Like a dream when one wakes up, O Jehovah, When you rouse yourself, you will dismiss their image.
21 But my heart was sour, And deep inside I felt sharp pain.
22 I was unreasoning and lacked understanding; I was like a senseless beast before you.
23 But now I am continually with you; You have taken hold of my right hand.
24 You guide me with your advice, And afterward you will lead me to glory.
25 Whom do I have in the heavens? And besides you I desire nothing on earth.
26 My body and my heart may fail, But God is the rock of my heart and my portion forever.
27 Truly, those keeping far from you will perish. You will put an end to everyone who immorally leaves you.
28 But as for me, drawing near to God is good for me. I have made the Sovereign Lord Jehovah my refuge, To declare all your works.
A masʹkil. Of Aʹsaph. 74 Why, O God, have you rejected us forever? Why does your anger burn against the flock of your pasture?
2 Remember the people you acquired long ago, The tribe you redeemed as your inheritance. Remember Mount Zion, where you have resided.
3 Direct your steps to the perpetual ruins. The enemy has devastated everything in the holy place.
4 Your foes roared inside your meeting place. They have set up their own banners as signs there.
5 They were like men wielding axes against a thick forest.
6 They broke up all its engravings with axes and iron bars.
7 They set your sanctuary on fire. They profaned the tabernacle bearing your name, casting it to the ground.
8 They and their offspring have said in their hearts: “All the meeting places of God in the land must be burned.”
9 There are no signs for us to see; There is no longer any prophet, And no one among us knows how long this will last.
10 How long, O God, will the adversary keep taunting? Will the enemy treat your name with disrespect forever?
11 Why do you hold back your hand, your right hand? Draw it out of your bosom and put an end to them.
12 But God is my King from long ago, The one performing acts of salvation on the earth.
13 You stirred up the sea with your strength; You smashed the heads of the sea monsters in the waters.
14 You crushed the heads of Le·viʹa·than; You gave it as food to the people, to those inhabiting the deserts.
15 You cut openings for the springs and the streams; You dried up ever-flowing rivers.
16 The day belongs to you, also the night. You made the light and the sun.
17 You set up all the boundaries of the earth; You made summer and winter.
18 Remember the enemy’s taunts, O Jehovah, How a foolish people treats your name with disrespect.
19 Do not surrender the life of your turtledove to the wild beasts. Do not forget the life of your afflicted people forever.
20 Remember the covenant, For the dark places of the earth have become full of the haunts of violence.
21 May the crushed one not turn away disappointed; May the lowly and the poor praise your name.
22 Rise up, O God, and plead your legal case. Remember how the foolish taunt you all day long.
23 Do not forget what your foes are saying. The uproar of those who defy you is ascending constantly.
To the director. Set to the melody “Do Not Bring to Ruin.” Of Aʹsaph. A song. 75 We give thanks to you, O God, we give thanks to you; Your name is near, And people declare your wondrous works.
2 You say: “When I set a time, I judge with fairness.
3 When the earth and all its inhabitants were dissolved, It was I who kept its pillars firm.” (Selah)
4 I say to the boastful, “Do not boast,” And to the wicked, “Do not exalt your strength.
5 Do not exalt your strength up high Or speak with arrogance.
6 For exaltation does not come From the east or the west or the south.
7 For God is Judge. He puts one man down and exalts another.
8 For there is a cup in Jehovah’s hand; The wine is foaming and is fully mixed. He will surely pour it out, And all the wicked of the earth will drink it, down to the dregs.”
9 But as for me, I will proclaim it forever; I will sing praises to the God of Jacob.
10 For he says: “I will cut off all the strength of the wicked, But the strength of the righteous will be exalted.”
To the director; to be accompanied with stringed instruments. A melody of Aʹsaph. A song. 76 God is known in Judah; In Israel his name is great.
2 His shelter is in Saʹlem, And his dwelling is in Zion.
3 There he broke the flaming arrows of the bow, The shield and the sword and the weapons of war. (Selah)
4 You shine brightly; You are more majestic than the mountains of prey.
5 The courageous of heart have been plundered. They have fallen asleep; The warriors were all helpless.
6 From your rebuke, O God of Jacob, Both the charioteer and the horse have fallen fast asleep.
7 You alone are awe-inspiring. Who can withstand your intense anger?
8 From heaven you pronounced judgment; The earth was afraid and was silent
9 When God rose up to execute judgment, To save all the meek of the earth. (Selah)
10 For the rage of man will serve to your praise; With the remnants of their rage you will adorn yourself.
11 Make your vows to Jehovah your God and pay them, Let all who are around him bring their gift in fear.
12 He will humble the pride of leaders; He inspires fear in the kings of the earth.
To the director; on Je·duʹthun. Of Aʹsaph. A melody. 77 With my voice I will cry out to God; To God I will cry out, and he will hear me.
2 In the day of my distress I search for Jehovah. At night my hands are stretched out to him without ceasing. I cannot be comforted.
3 When I remember God, I groan; I am troubled and my strength fails. (Selah)
4 You hold my eyelids open; I am agitated and cannot speak.
5 My thoughts turn to the days of long ago, The years of the distant past.
6 During the night I remember my song; I ponder in my heart; I make a diligent search.
7 Will Jehovah cast us off forever? Will he never again show his favor?
8 Has his loyal love ceased forever? Will his promise come to nothing for all generations?
9 Has God forgotten to show his favor, Or has his anger caused his mercy to cease? (Selah)
10 Must I keep saying: “This is what distresses me: The Most High has changed his position toward us”?
11 I will remember the works of Jah; I will remember your marvelous deeds of long ago.
12 And I will meditate on all your activity And ponder over your dealings.
13 O God, your ways are holy. What god is as great as you, O God?
14 You are the true God, who does marvelous things. You have revealed your strength to the peoples.
15 With your power you have rescued your people, The sons of Jacob and of Joseph. (Selah)
16 The waters saw you, O God; The waters saw you and were disturbed. And the deep waters became agitated.
17 The clouds poured down water. The cloudy skies thundered, And your arrows flew here and there.
18 The sound of your thunder was like chariot wheels; Flashes of lightning lit up the inhabited earth; The earth trembled and quaked.
19 Your way was through the sea, Your path through many waters; But your footprints could not be traced.
20 You led your people just like a flock, In the care of Moses and Aaron.
Masʹkil. Of Aʹsaph. 78 Listen, my people, to my law; Incline your ear to the words of my mouth.
2 I will open my mouth in a proverb. I will propound riddles of long ago.
3 The things we have heard and know, Which our fathers have related to us,
4 We will not hide from their sons; We will relate to the generation to come The praiseworthy deeds of Jehovah and his strength, The wonderful things he has done.
5 He established a reminder in Jacob And set a law in Israel; He commanded our forefathers To make these things known to their children,
6 So that the next generation, The children yet to be born, might know them. They in turn would relate them to their children.
7 Then these would put their confidence in God. They would not forget God’s works But would observe his commandments.
8 Then they would not be like their forefathers, A stubborn and rebellious generation, A generation whose heart was unsteady And whose spirit was not faithful to God.
9 The Eʹphra·im·ites were armed with the bow, But they retreated in the day of battle.
10 They did not keep the covenant of God And refused to walk in his law.
11 They also forgot what he had done, His wonderful works that he showed them.
12 He did marvelous things in the sight of their forefathers, In the land of Egypt, the region of Zoʹan.
13 He split the sea to let them pass through, And he made the waters stand up like a dam.
14 He led them with a cloud by day And the whole night with the light of a fire.
15 He split rocks in the wilderness, He let them drink their fill as if from deep waters.
16 He brought streams out of a crag And caused waters to flow down like rivers.
17 But they continued to sin against him By rebelling against the Most High in the desert;
18 They challenged God in their heart By demanding food that they craved.
19 So they spoke against God, Saying: “Can God spread a table in the wilderness?”
20 Look! He struck a rock So that waters flowed and streams flooded out. “Can he also give us bread, Or can he provide meat for his people?”
21 When Jehovah heard them, he became furious; A fire blazed against Jacob, And his anger flared up against Israel
22 Because they did not put faith in God; They did not trust in his ability to save them.
23 So he commanded the cloudy skies above, And he opened the doors of heaven.
24 He kept raining down manna for them to eat; He gave them the grain of heaven.
25 Men ate the bread of mighty ones; He provided enough to satisfy them.
26 He stirred up the east wind in the heavens And made a south wind blow by his power.
27 And he rained down meat on them like dust, Birds like the sand of the seashore.
28 He made them fall in the midst of his camp, All around his tents.
29 And they ate and gorged themselves; He gave them what they desired.
30 But before they fully satisfied their craving, While their food was yet in their mouth,
31 God’s wrath flared up against them. He put to death their strongest men; He brought down the young men of Israel.
32 Despite this they sinned even more And did not put faith in his wonderful works.
33 So he brought their days to an end as if a mere breath, And their years by sudden terrors.
34 But as often as he killed them, they would search for him; They would return and look for God,
35 Remembering that God was their Rock And that the Most High God was their Redeemer.
36 But they tried to deceive him with their mouth And lied to him with their tongue.
37 Their heart was not steadfast toward him; And they were not faithful to his covenant.
38 But he was merciful; He would forgive their error and not bring them to ruin. He often held back his anger Instead of stirring up all his wrath.
39 For he remembered that they were flesh, A wind that blows past and does not return.
40 How often they rebelled against him in the wilderness And made him feel hurt in the desert!
41 Again and again they put God to the test, And they grieved the Holy One of Israel.
42 They did not remember his power, The day that he rescued them from the adversary,
43 How he displayed his signs in Egypt And his miracles in the region of Zoʹan,
44 And how he turned the Nile canals into blood So that they could not drink from their streams.
45 He sent swarms of gadflies to devour them And frogs to bring them to ruin.
46 He gave their crops to the voracious locusts, The fruit of their labor to the swarming locusts.
47 He destroyed their vines with hail And their sycamore trees with hailstones.
48 He gave their beasts of burden over to the hail And their livestock to the lightning bolts.
49 He inflicted his burning anger on them, Fury and indignation and distress, Companies of angels bringing calamity.
50 He cleared a pathway for his anger. He did not spare them from death; And he gave them over to pestilence.
51 Finally he struck down all the firstborn of Egypt, The beginning of their procreative power in the tents of Ham.
52 Then he brought his people out like a flock And guided them like a drove in the wilderness.
53 He led them in security, And they felt no fear; The sea covered their enemies.
54 And he brought them to his holy territory, This mountainous region that his right hand acquired.
55 He drove out the nations from before them; He allotted to them an inheritance by the measuring line; He settled the tribes of Israel in their homes.
56 But they kept challenging God the Most High, and rebelling against him; They did not pay attention to his reminders.
57 They also turned away and were as treacherous as their forefathers. They were as unreliable as a loose bow.
58 They kept offending him with their high places, And they incited him to fury with their carved images.
59 God heard and became furious, So he utterly rejected Israel.
60 He finally forsook the tabernacle of Shiʹloh, The tent where he had resided among men.
61 He let the symbol of his strength go into captivity; His splendor into the hand of the adversary.
62 He handed his people over to the sword And became furious with his inheritance.
63 Fire consumed his young men, And to his virgins no wedding songs were sung.
64 His priests fell by the sword, And their own widows did not weep.
65 Then Jehovah woke up as from sleep, Like a mighty man waking up from wine.
66 And he drove his adversaries back; He put them to lasting disgrace.
67 He rejected the tent of Joseph; He did not choose the tribe of Eʹphra·im.
68 But he chose the tribe of Judah, Mount Zion, which he loves.
69 He made his sanctuary as enduring as the heavens, Like the earth that he has established forever.
70 He chose David his servant And took him from the sheep pens,
71 From tending the nursing ewes; He made him the shepherd over Jacob, his people, And over Israel, his inheritance.
72 He shepherded them with integrity of heart, And with skillful hands he led them.
A melody of Aʹsaph. 79 O God, the nations have invaded your inheritance; They have defiled your holy temple; They have turned Jerusalem into a heap of ruins.
2 They have given the dead bodies of your servants as food to the birds of the heavens And the flesh of your loyal ones to the wild beasts of the earth.
3 They have poured out their blood like water around Jerusalem, And no one is left to bury them.
4 We have become an object of reproach to our neighbors; Those around us ridicule and jeer us.
5 How long, O Jehovah, will you be furious? Forever? How long will your indignation burn just like fire?
6 Pour out your wrath on the nations that do not know you And on the kingdoms that do not call on your name.
7 For they have devoured Jacob And have desolated his homeland.
8 Do not hold us accountable for the errors of our ancestors. Quickly show us your mercy, For we have been brought very low.
9 Help us, O God of our salvation, For the sake of your glorious name; Rescue us and forgive our sins for the sake of your name.
10 Why should the nations say: “Where is their God?” Before our eyes may it become known among the nations That the shed blood of your servants has been avenged.
11 May you hear the sighing of the prisoner. Use your great power to preserve those sentenced to death.
12 Repay our neighbors sevenfold For the taunts they have leveled at you, O Jehovah.
13 Then we, your people and the flock of your pasture, Will give thanks to you forever; And we will declare your praise from generation to generation.
To the director; set to “The Lilies.” A reminder. Of Aʹsaph. A melody. 80 O Shepherd of Israel, listen, You who are guiding Joseph just like a flock. You who sit enthroned above the cherubs, Shine forth.
2 Before Eʹphra·im and Benjamin and Ma·nasʹseh, Do stir up your mightiness; Come and save us.
3 O God, restore us; Let your face shine upon us, so that we may be saved.
4 Jehovah God of armies, how long will you be hostile toward the prayer of your people?
5 You feed them tears as their bread, And you make them drink tears beyond measure.
6 You let our neighbors quarrel over us; Our enemies keep mocking us as they please.
7 O God of armies, restore us; Let your face shine upon us, so that we may be saved.
8 You made a vine depart from Egypt. You drove out the nations and planted it.
9 You cleared a space for it, And it took root and filled the land.
10 The mountains were covered by its shadow, And the cedars of God by its branches.
11 Its branches reached as far as the sea, And its shoots to the River.
12 Why have you broken down the stone walls of the vineyard, So that all those passing by pluck its fruit?
13 The boars of the forest ravage it, And the wild animals of the field feed on it.
14 O God of armies, please return. Look down from heaven and see! Take care of this vine,
15 The stock that your right hand has planted, And look upon the son whom you made strong for yourself.
16 It is burned with fire, cut down. They perish at your rebuke.
17 May your hand give support to the man at your right hand, To the son of man you have made strong for yourself.
18 Then we will not turn away from you. Preserve us alive, so that we may call on your name.
19 O Jehovah God of armies, restore us; Let your face shine upon us, so that we may be saved.
To the director; upon the Gitʹtith. Of Aʹsaph. 81 Shout joyfully to God our strength. Shout in triumph to the God of Jacob.
2 Begin the music and take a tambourine, The melodious harp together with the stringed instrument.
3 Blow the horn on the new moon, On the full moon, for the day of our festival.
4 For it is a decree for Israel, A ruling of the God of Jacob.
5 He established it as a reminder for Joseph When He went out against the land of Egypt. I heard a voice that I did not recognize:
6 “I lifted the burden from his shoulder; His hands were freed from the basket.
7 In your distress you called, and I rescued you; I answered you from the thundercloud. I tested you at the waters of Merʹi·bah. (Selah)
8 Hear, my people, and I will testify against you. O Israel, if you would only listen to me.
9 Among you, there will be no strange god, And you will not bow down to a foreign god.
10 I, Jehovah, am your God, The one who brought you out of the land of Egypt. Open your mouth wide, and I will fill it.
11 But my people did not listen to my voice; Israel would not submit to me.
12 So I let them follow their stubborn hearts; They did what they thought was right.
13 If only my people would listen to me, If only Israel would walk in my ways!
14 Their enemies I would quickly subdue; I would turn my hand against their adversaries.
15 Those who hate Jehovah will cringe in his presence, And their outcome will be forever.
16 But he will feed you with the finest wheat And satisfy you with honey from the rock.”
A melody of Aʹsaph. 82 God takes his place in the divine assembly; In the middle of the gods he judges:
2 “How long will you continue to judge with injustice And show partiality to the wicked? (Selah)
3 Defend the lowly and the fatherless. Render justice to the helpless and destitute.
4 Rescue the lowly and the poor; Save them out of the hand of the wicked.”
5 They do not know, nor do they understand; They are walking about in darkness; All the foundations of the earth are being shaken.
6 “I have said, ‘You are gods, All of you are sons of the Most High.
7 But you will die just as men do; And like any other prince you will fall!’”
8 Rise up, O God, and judge the earth, For all the nations belong to you.
A song. A melody of Aʹsaph. 83 O God, do not be silent; Do not keep quiet or still, O Divine One.
2 For look! your enemies are in an uproar; Those who hate you act arrogantly.
3 With cunning they secretly plot against your people; They conspire against your treasured ones.
4 They say: “Come, let us annihilate them as a nation, So that the name of Israel may be remembered no more.”
5 They devise a unified strategy; They have made an alliance against you—
6 The tents of Eʹdom and the Ishʹma·el·ites, Moʹab and the Hagʹrites,
7 Geʹbal and Amʹmon and Amʹa·lek, Phi·lisʹti·a together with the inhabitants of Tyre.
8 As·syrʹi·a too has joined them; They give support to the sons of Lot. (Selah)
9 Do to them as you did to Midʹi·an, As you did to Sisʹe·ra and Jaʹbin at the stream of Kiʹshon.
10 They were annihilated at En-dor; They became manure for the ground.
11 Make their nobles like Oʹreb and Zeʹeb And their princes like Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna,
12 For they said: “Let us take possession of the land where God dwells.”
13 O my God, make them like a whirling thistle, Like stubble blown about by the wind.
14 Like a fire that burns up the forest, Like a flame that scorches the mountains,
15 So may you pursue them with your tempest And terrify them with your windstorm.
16 Cover their faces with dishonor, So that they may search for your name, O Jehovah.
17 May they be put to shame and be terrified forever; May they be disgraced and perish;
18 May people know that you, whose name is Jehovah, You alone are the Most High over all the earth.
For the director; upon the Gitʹtith. Of the sons of Korʹah. A melody. 84 How lovely your grand tabernacle is, O Jehovah of armies!
2 My whole being yearns, Yes, I am faint with longing, For the courtyards of Jehovah. My heart and my flesh shout joyfully to the living God.
3 Even the bird finds a home there And the swallow a nest for herself, Where she cares for her young Near your grand altar, O Jehovah of armies, My King and my God!
4 Happy are those dwelling in your house! They continue to praise you. (Selah)
5 Happy are the men who find their strength in you, Whose hearts are set on the highways.
6 When they pass through the Baʹca Valley, They make it into a place of springs; And the early rain clothes it with blessings.
7 They will walk on from strength to strength; Each one appears before God in Zion.
8 O Jehovah God of armies, hear my prayer; Listen, O God of Jacob. (Selah)
9 Look, our shield and our God, Look upon the face of your anointed one.
10 For a day in your courtyards is better than a thousand anywhere else! I choose to stand at the threshold of the house of my God Rather than to dwell in the tents of wickedness.
11 For Jehovah God is a sun and a shield; He gives favor and glory. Jehovah will not hold back anything good From those walking in integrity.
12 O Jehovah of armies, Happy is the man who trusts in you.
For the director. Of the sons of Korʹah. A melody. 85 You have shown favor, O Jehovah, to your land; You brought back those of Jacob who were taken captive.
2 You have pardoned the error of your people; You forgave all their sin. (Selah)
3 You held back all your fury; You turned away from your hot anger.
4 Restore us, O God of our salvation, And set aside your displeasure with us.
5 Will you be furious with us forever? Will you prolong your anger to generation after generation?
6 Will you not revive us again So that your people may rejoice in you?
7 Show your loyal love to us, O Jehovah, And grant us your salvation.
8 I will listen to what the true God Jehovah says, For he will speak peace to his people, to his loyal ones, But let them not return to overconfidence.
9 Surely his salvation is near to those who fear him, So that his glory may reside in our land.
10 Loyal love and faithfulness will meet together; Righteousness and peace will kiss each other.
11 Faithfulness will sprout from the earth, And righteousness will look down from the heavens.
12 Yes, Jehovah will give what is good, And our land will yield its harvest.
13 Righteousness will walk before him And make a path for his footsteps.
A prayer of David. 86 Incline your ear, O Jehovah, and answer me, For I am afflicted and poor.
2 Guard my life, for I am loyal. Save your servant who is trusting in you, For you are my God.
3 Show me favor, O Jehovah, For I call to you all day long.
4 Make your servant rejoice, For to you, O Jehovah, I turn.
5 For you, O Jehovah, are good and ready to forgive; You abound in loyal love for all those who call on you.
6 Listen, O Jehovah, to my prayer; And pay attention to my pleas for help.
7 I call on you in the day of my distress, For you will answer me.
8 There is none like you among the gods, O Jehovah, There are no works like yours.
9 All the nations that you made Will come and bow down before you, O Jehovah, And they will give glory to your name.
10 For you are great and do wondrous things; You are God, you alone.
11 Instruct me, O Jehovah, about your way. I will walk in your truth. Unify my heart to fear your name.
12 I praise you, O Jehovah my God, with all my heart, And I will glorify your name forever,
13 For your loyal love toward me is great, And you have saved my life from the depths of the Grave.
14 O God, presumptuous men rise up against me; A band of ruthless men seek to take my life, And they have no regard for you.
15 But you, O Jehovah, are a God merciful and compassionate, Slow to anger and abundant in loyal love and faithfulness.
16 Turn to me and show me favor. Give your strength to your servant, And save the son of your slave girl.
17 Show me a sign of your goodness, So that those who hate me may see it and be put to shame. For you, O Jehovah, are my helper and comforter.
Of the sons of Korʹah. A melody. A song. 87 His city’s foundation is in the holy mountains.
2 Jehovah loves the gates of Zion More than all the tents of Jacob.
3 Glorious things are being said about you, O city of the true God. (Selah)
4 I will count Raʹhab and Babylon among those who know me; Here are Phi·lisʹti·a and Tyre, together with Cush. It will be said: “This is one who was born there.”
5 And about Zion it will be said: “Each and every one was born in her.” And the Most High will firmly establish her.
6 Jehovah will declare, when recording the peoples: “This is one who was born there.” (Selah)
7 Singers and those performing circle dances will say: “All my springs are in you.”
A song. A melody of the sons of Korʹah. To the director; in the style of Maʹha·lath, to be sung alternately. Masʹkil of Heʹman the Ezʹra·hite. 88 O Jehovah, the God of my salvation, By day I cry out, And by night I come before you.
2 Let my prayer come to you, Incline your ear to my cry for help.
3 For my soul has been filled with calamity, And my life is on the brink of the Grave.
4 I am already counted among those going down to the pit; I have become a helpless man,
5 Left among the dead Like the slain lying in a grave, Whom you remember no longer And who have been separated from your care.
6 You have put me in the lowest pit, In dark places, in a large abyss.
7 Your rage weighs heavily on me, And you overwhelm me with your crashing waves. (Selah)
8 You have driven my acquaintances far away from me; You have made me something detestable to them. I am trapped and cannot escape.
9 My eye is worn out because of my affliction. I call on you, O Jehovah, all day long; To you I spread out my hands.
10 Will you perform wonders for the dead? Can those powerless in death rise up to praise you? (Selah)
11 Will your loyal love be declared in the grave, Your faithfulness in the place of destruction?
12 Will your wonders be known in the darkness Or your righteousness in the land of oblivion?
13 But I still cry to you for help, O Jehovah, Each morning my prayer comes before you.
14 Why, O Jehovah, do you reject me? Why do you hide your face from me?
15 From my youth on, I have been afflicted and ready to perish; I am numb from the terrible things you allow me to suffer.
16 Your burning anger overwhelms me; Your terrors destroy me.
17 They surround me like waters all day long; They close in on me from all sides.
18 You have driven my friends and companions far away from me; Darkness has become my companion.
Masʹkil. Of Eʹthan the Ezʹra·hite. 89 I will sing about Jehovah’s expressions of loyal love forever. With my mouth I will make known your faithfulness to all generations.
2 For I have said: “Loyal love will be built up forever, And you have firmly established your faithfulness in the heavens.”
3 “I have made a covenant with my chosen one; I have sworn to David my servant:
4 ‘I will firmly establish your offspring forever, And I will build up your throne for all generations.’” (Selah)
5 The heavens praise your marvels, O Jehovah, Yes, your faithfulness in the congregation of the holy ones.
6 For who in the skies can compare to Jehovah? Who among the sons of God is like Jehovah?
7 God is held in awe in the council of holy ones; He is grand and awe-inspiring to all who are around him.
8 O Jehovah God of armies, Who is mighty like you, O Jah? Your faithfulness surrounds you.
9 You rule over the raging of the sea; When its waves surge, you calm them.
10 You have crushed Raʹhab like one who is slain. With your strong arm you have scattered your enemies.
11 The heavens are yours, and the earth is yours; The productive land and what fills it—you have founded them.
12 The north and the south—you created them; Taʹbor and Herʹmon joyously praise your name.
13 Your arm is mighty; Your hand is strong; Your right hand is exalted.
14 Righteousness and justice are the foundation of your throne; Loyal love and faithfulness stand before you.
15 Happy are the people who know the joyful shouting. O Jehovah, they walk in the light of your face.
16 They rejoice in your name all day long, And in your righteousness they are exalted.
17 For you are the glory of their strength, And by your approval our strength is exalted.
18 For our shield belongs to Jehovah, Our king belongs to the Holy One of Israel.
19 At that time you spoke in a vision to your loyal ones and said: “I have granted strength to a mighty one; I have exalted a chosen one from among the people.
20 I have found David my servant; With my holy oil I have anointed him.
21 My hand will support him, And my arm will strengthen him.
22 No enemy will exact tribute from him, And no unrighteous man will oppress him.
23 I will crush to pieces his adversaries from before him And strike down those who hate him.
24 My faithfulness and loyal love are with him, And in my name his strength will be exalted.
25 I will put his hand over the sea And his right hand over the rivers.
26 He will call out to me: ‘You are my Father, My God and the Rock of my salvation.’
27 And I will place him as firstborn, The highest of the kings of the earth.
28 I will maintain my loyal love for him forever, And my covenant with him will never fail.
29 I will establish his offspring forever And make his throne as enduring as the heavens.
30 If his sons leave my law And do not walk according to my decrees,
31 If they violate my statutes And do not keep my commandments,
32 Then I will punish their disobedience with a rod And their error with flogging.
33 But I will never abandon my loyal love for him Nor be untrue to my promise.
34 I will not violate my covenant Or change what my lips have spoken.
35 I have sworn in my holiness, once and for all; I will not tell lies to David.
36 His offspring will endure forever; His throne will endure like the sun before me.
37 Like the moon, it will be firmly established forever As a faithful witness in the skies.” (Selah)
38 But you yourself have cast off and rejected him; You have become furious with your anointed one.
39 You have spurned the covenant with your servant; You have profaned his crown by throwing it to the ground.
40 You have broken down all his stone walls; You have reduced his fortifications to ruins.
41 All who pass by have pillaged him; He is a reproach to his neighbors.
42 You have made his adversaries victorious; You have caused all his enemies to rejoice.
43 You have also driven back his sword, And you have made him lose ground in the battle.
44 You have brought an end to his splendor And hurled his throne to the ground.
45 You have cut short the days of his youth; You have clothed him with shame. (Selah)
46 How long, O Jehovah, will you hide yourself? Will it be forever? Will your rage continue to burn like a fire?
47 Remember how short my life is! Was it to no purpose that you created all humans?
48 What man can live and never see death? Can he save himself from the power of the Grave? (Selah)
49 Where are your former acts of loyal love, O Jehovah, That you swore about to David in your faithfulness?
50 Remember, O Jehovah, the taunts hurled at your servants; How I have to bear the taunts of all the peoples;
51 How your enemies have hurled insults, O Jehovah; How they have insulted every footstep of your anointed one.
52 May Jehovah be praised forever. Amen and Amen.
91 Anyone dwelling in the secret place of the Most High Will lodge under the shadow of the Almighty.
2 I will say to Jehovah: “You are my refuge and my stronghold, My God in whom I trust.”
3 For he will rescue you from the trap of the birdcatcher, From the destructive pestilence.
4 With his pinions he will cover you, And under his wings you will take refuge. His faithfulness will be a large shield and a protective wall.
5 You will not fear the terrors of the night, Nor the arrow that flies by day,
6 Nor the pestilence that stalks in the gloom, Nor the destruction that ravages at midday.
7 A thousand will fall at your side And ten thousand at your right hand, But to you it will not come near.
8 You will only see it with your eyes As you witness the punishment of the wicked.
9 Because you said: “Jehovah is my refuge,” You have made the Most High your dwelling;
10 No disaster will befall you, And no plague will come near your tent.
11 For he will give his angels a command concerning you, To guard you in all your ways.
12 They will carry you on their hands, So that you may not strike your foot against a stone.
13 On the young lion and the cobra you will tread; You will trample underfoot the maned lion and the big snake.
14 God said: “Because he has affection for me, I will rescue him. I will protect him because he knows my name.
15 He will call on me, and I will answer him. I will be with him in distress. I will rescue him and glorify him.
16 I will satisfy him with long life, And I will cause him to see my acts of salvation.”
A melody. A song for the Sabbath day. 92 It is good to give thanks to Jehovah And to sing praises to your name, O Most High,
2 To declare your loyal love in the morning And your faithfulness during the nights,
3 Accompanied by a ten-stringed instrument and a lute, By the melodious sound of a harp.
4 For you have made me rejoice, O Jehovah, because of your deeds; Because of the works of your hands I shout joyfully.
5 How great your works are, O Jehovah! How very deep your thoughts are!
6 No unreasoning man can know them; And no foolish person can understand this:
7 When the wicked sprout like weeds And all the wrongdoers flourish, It is that they may be annihilated forever.
8 But you are exalted forever, O Jehovah.
9 Indeed, look in triumph on your enemies, O Jehovah, Look at how your enemies will perish; All the wrongdoers will be scattered.
10 But you will exalt my strength like that of a wild bull; I will moisten my skin with fresh oil.
11 My eyes will look in triumph on my foes; My ears will hear about the downfall of the evil men who attack me.
12 But the righteous will flourish like a palm tree And grow big like a cedar in Lebʹa·non.
13 They are planted in the house of Jehovah; They flourish in the courtyards of our God.
14 Even in old age they will still be thriving; They will remain vigorous and fresh,
15 Declaring that Jehovah is upright. He is my Rock, in whom there is no unrighteousness.
93 Jehovah has become King! With grandeur he is clothed; Jehovah is clothed with strength; He wears it like a belt. The earth is firmly established; It cannot be moved.
2 Your throne was firmly established long ago; From eternity you have existed.
3 The rivers have surged, O Jehovah, The rivers have surged and roared; The rivers keep surging and pounding.
4 Above the sound of many waters, Mightier than the breaking waves of the sea, Jehovah is majestic in the heights.
5 Your reminders are very trustworthy. Holiness adorns your house, O Jehovah, for all times.
94 O God of vengeance, Jehovah, O God of vengeance, shine forth!
2 Rise up, O Judge of the earth. Repay to the haughty what they deserve.
3 How long will the wicked, O Jehovah, How long will the wicked continue to exult?
4 They babble and speak arrogantly; All the wrongdoers brag about themselves.
5 They crush your people, O Jehovah, And oppress your inheritance.
6 They kill the widow and the foreign resident, And they murder the fatherless children.
7 They say: “Jah does not see; The God of Jacob does not take notice of it.”
8 Understand this, you who are unreasoning; You foolish ones, when will you ever show insight?
9 The One who made the ear, can he not hear? The One who formed the eye, can he not see?
10 The One correcting the nations, can he not reprove? He is the One who imparts knowledge to people!
11 Jehovah knows the thoughts of men, That they are but a mere breath.
12 Happy is the man whom you correct, O Jah, Whom you teach from your law,
13 To give him tranquillity during days of calamity, Until a pit is dug for the wicked.
14 For Jehovah will not forsake his people, Nor will he abandon his inheritance.
15 For judgment will once again be righteous, And all the upright in heart will follow it.
16 Who will rise up for me against the wicked? Who will take a stand for me against the wrongdoers?
17 If Jehovah had not been my helper, I would soon have perished.
18 When I said: “My foot is slipping,” Your loyal love, O Jehovah, kept supporting me.
19 When anxieties overwhelmed me, You comforted and soothed me.
20 Can a throne of corruption be allied with you While it is framing trouble in the name of the law?
21 They make vicious attacks on the righteous one And condemn the innocent one to death.
22 But Jehovah will become a secure refuge for me, My God is my rock of refuge.
23 He will make their wicked deeds come back upon them. He will do away with them by means of their own evil. Jehovah our God will do away with them.
96 Sing to Jehovah a new song. Sing to Jehovah, all the earth!
2 Sing to Jehovah; praise his name. Proclaim the good news of his salvation day after day.
3 Declare his glory among the nations, His wonderful works among all the peoples.
4 Jehovah is great and most worthy of praise. He is more awe-inspiring than all other gods.
5 All the gods of the peoples are worthless gods, But Jehovah is the one who made the heavens.
6 In his presence are majesty and splendor; Strength and beauty are in his sanctuary.
7 Give Jehovah his due, you families of the peoples, Give Jehovah his due for his glory and strength.
8 Give Jehovah the glory due his name; Bring a gift and come into his courtyards.
9 Bow down to Jehovah in holy adornment; Tremble before him, all the earth!
10 Declare among the nations: “Jehovah has become King! The earth is firmly established, it cannot be moved. He will judge the peoples fairly.”
11 Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be joyful; Let the sea thunder and all that fills it;
12 Let the fields and everything in them rejoice. At the same time let all the trees of the forest shout joyfully
13 Before Jehovah, for he is coming, He is coming to judge the earth. He will judge the inhabited earth with righteousness And the peoples with his faithfulness.
97 Jehovah has become King! Let the earth be joyful. Let the many islands rejoice.
2 Clouds and thick gloom are all around him; Righteousness and justice are the foundation of his throne.
3 Fire goes before him And consumes his adversaries on every side.
4 His lightning bolts light up the land; The earth sees it and trembles.
5 The mountains melt like wax before Jehovah, Before the Lord of the whole earth.
6 The heavens proclaim his righteousness, And all the peoples see his glory.
7 Let all those serving any carved image be put to shame, Those who boast about their worthless gods. Bow down to him, all you gods.
8 Zion hears and rejoices; The towns of Judah are joyful Because of your judgments, O Jehovah.
9 For you, O Jehovah, are the Most High over all the earth; You are exalted far above all other gods.
10 O you who love Jehovah, hate what is bad. He is guarding the lives of his loyal ones; He rescues them from the hand of the wicked.
11 Light has flashed up for the righteous And rejoicing for those upright in heart.
12 Rejoice in Jehovah, you righteous ones, And give thanks to his holy name.
A melody. 98 Sing to Jehovah a new song, For he has done wonderful things. His right hand, his holy arm, has brought about salvation.
2 Jehovah has made known his salvation; He has revealed his righteousness before the nations.
3 He has remembered his loyal love and faithfulness to the house of Israel. All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation by our God.
4 Shout in triumph to Jehovah, all the earth. Be cheerful and shout joyfully and sing praises.
5 Sing praises to Jehovah with the harp, With the harp and the melodious song.
6 With the trumpets and the sound of the horn, Shout in triumph before the King, Jehovah.
7 Let the sea thunder and all that fills it, The earth and those dwelling in it.
8 Let the rivers clap their hands; Let the mountains shout joyfully together
9 Before Jehovah, for he is coming to judge the earth. He will judge the inhabited earth with righteousness And the peoples with fairness.
99 Jehovah has become King. Let the peoples tremble. He sits enthroned above the cherubs. Let the earth shake.
2 Jehovah is great in Zion, And he is high over all the peoples.
3 Let them praise your great name, For it is awe-inspiring and holy.
4 He is a mighty king who loves justice. You have firmly established what is upright. You have brought about justice and righteousness in Jacob.
5 Exalt Jehovah our God and bow down at his footstool; He is holy.
6 Moses and Aaron were among his priests, And Samuel was among those calling on his name. They would call to Jehovah, And he would answer them.
7 He would speak to them from the pillar of cloud. They kept his reminders and the decree that he gave to them.
8 O Jehovah our God, you answered them. You were a God who pardoned them, But you punished them for their sinful deeds.
9 Exalt Jehovah our God And bow down before his holy mountain, For Jehovah our God is holy.
A melody of thanksgiving. 100 Shout in triumph to Jehovah, all the earth.
2 Serve Jehovah with rejoicing. Come into his presence with joyful shouting.
3 Know that Jehovah is God. He is the one who made us, and we belong to him. We are his people and the sheep of his pasture.
4 Come into his gates with thanksgiving, Into his courtyards with praise. Give thanks to him; praise his name.
5 For Jehovah is good; His loyal love endures forever, And his faithfulness through all generations.
Of David. A melody. 101 I will sing about loyal love and justice. To you, O Jehovah, I will sing praises.
2 I will act with discretion and blamelessness. When will you come to me? I will walk with integrity of heart inside my house.
3 I will not set anything worthless before my eyes. I hate the deeds of those who deviate from what is right; I will have nothing to do with them.
4 A crooked heart is far from me; I will not accept what is bad.
5 Anyone slandering his neighbor in secret, I will silence. Anyone with haughty eyes and an arrogant heart, I will not tolerate.
6 I will look to the faithful ones of the earth, So that they may dwell with me. The one walking in blamelessness will minister to me.
7 No deceitful person will dwell in my house, And no liar will stand in my presence.
8 Every morning I will silence all the wicked of the earth, To cut off all wrongdoers from the city of Jehovah.
A prayer of the oppressed one when he is in despair and pours out his concern before Jehovah. 102 O Jehovah, hear my prayer; Let my cry for help reach you.
2 Do not hide your face from me in my time of distress. Incline your ear to me; Do answer me quickly when I call.
3 For my days are vanishing like smoke, And my bones are charred like a fireplace.
4 My heart has been struck down like grass and has withered, For I forget to eat my food.
5 Because of my loud groaning, My bones cling to my flesh.
6 I resemble the pelican of the wilderness; I am like a little owl among the ruins.
7 I lie awake; I am like a solitary bird on a roof.
8 All day long my enemies taunt me. Those who mock me use my name as a curse.
9 For I eat ashes as my bread, And my drink is mingled with tears,
10 Because of your anger and your indignation, For you lifted me up only to cast me aside.
11 My days are like a fading shadow, And I am withering like grass.
12 But you remain forever, O Jehovah, And your fame will endure for all generations.
13 Surely you will rise up and show mercy on Zion, For it is time to show her your favor; The appointed time has come.
14 For your servants find pleasure in her stones And have affection even for her dust.
15 The nations will fear the name of Jehovah, And all the kings of the earth your glory.
16 For Jehovah will rebuild Zion; He will appear in his glory.
17 He will pay attention to the prayer of the destitute; He will not despise their prayer.
18 This is written for the future generation, So that a people yet to be brought forth will praise Jah.
19 For he looks down from his holy height, From the heavens Jehovah views the earth,
20 To hear the sighing of the prisoner, To release those sentenced to death,
21 So that the name of Jehovah will be declared in Zion And his praise in Jerusalem,
22 When the peoples and kingdoms Gather together to serve Jehovah.
23 He prematurely robbed me of my strength; He cut short my days.
24 I said: “O my God, Do not do away with me in the middle of my life, You whose years span all generations.
25 Long ago you laid the foundations of the earth, And the heavens are the work of your hands.
26 They will perish, but you will remain; Just like a garment they will all wear out. Just like clothing you will replace them, and they will pass away.
27 But you are the same, and your years will never end.
28 The children of your servants will dwell securely, And their offspring will be firmly established before you.”
Of David. 103 Let me praise Jehovah; Let everything within me praise his holy name.
2 Let me praise Jehovah; May I never forget all that he has done.
3 He forgives all your errors And heals all your ailments;
4 He reclaims your life from the pit And crowns you with his loyal love and mercy.
5 He satisfies you with good things all your life, So that your youth is renewed like that of an eagle.
6 Jehovah acts with righteousness and justice For all who are oppressed.
7 He made known his ways to Moses, His deeds to the sons of Israel.
8 Jehovah is merciful and compassionate, Slow to anger and abundant in loyal love.
9 He will not always find fault, Nor will he stay resentful forever.
10 He has not dealt with us according to our sins, Nor has he repaid us what our errors deserve.
11 For as the heavens are higher than the earth, So great is his loyal love toward those who fear him.
12 As far off as the sunrise is from the sunset, So far off from us he has put our transgressions.
13 As a father shows mercy to his sons, Jehovah has shown mercy to those who fear him.
14 For he well knows how we are formed, Remembering that we are dust.
15 As for mortal man, his days are like those of grass; He blooms like a blossom of the field.
16 But when a wind blows, it is no more, As though it was never there.
17 But the loyal love of Jehovah is for all eternity Toward those who fear him, And his righteousness toward their children’s children,
18 Toward those who keep his covenant And those who are careful to observe his orders.
19 Jehovah has firmly established his throne in the heavens; And his kingship rules over everything.
20 Praise Jehovah, all you his angels, mighty in power, Who carry out his word, obeying his voice.
21 Praise Jehovah, all his armies, His ministers who do his will.
22 Praise Jehovah, all his works, In all the places where he rules. Let my whole being praise Jehovah.
104 Let me praise Jehovah. O Jehovah my God, you are very great. With majesty and splendor you are clothed.
2 You are wrapped in light as with a garment; You stretch out the heavens like a tent cloth.
3 He lays beams of his upper rooms in the waters above, Making the clouds his chariot, Moving on the wings of the wind.
4 He makes his angels spirits, His ministers a consuming fire.
5 He has established the earth on its foundations; It will not be moved from its place forever and ever.
6 You covered it with deep waters as with a garment. The waters stood above the mountains.
7 At your rebuke they fled; At the sound of your thunder they ran away in panic
8 —Mountains ascended and valleys descended— To the place you established for them.
9 You set a boundary that they should not pass, That they should never again cover the earth.
10 He sends springs into the valleys; Between the mountains they flow.
11 They provide water for all the wild beasts of the field; The wild donkeys quench their thirst.
12 Above them roost the birds of the sky; They sing among the thick foliage.
13 He is watering the mountains from his upper rooms. With the fruitage of your works the earth is satisfied.
14 He is making grass grow for the cattle And vegetation for mankind’s use, To grow food from the land
15 And wine that makes man’s heart rejoice, Oil that makes the face shine, And bread that sustains the heart of mortal man.
16 The trees of Jehovah are satisfied, The cedars of Lebʹa·non that he planted,
17 Where the birds make nests. The home of the stork is in the juniper trees.
18 The high mountains are for the mountain goats; The crags are a refuge for the rock badgers.
19 He has made the moon to mark the appointed times; The sun well knows when to set.
20 You bring darkness, and night falls, When all the wild animals of the forest roam about.
21 The young lions roar for their prey And seek their food from God.
22 When the sun rises, They withdraw and lie down in their dens.
23 Man goes to his work, And he labors until evening.
24 How many your works are, O Jehovah! You have made all of them in wisdom. The earth is full of what you have made.
25 There is the sea, so great and wide, Teeming with countless living things, both small and great.
26 There the ships travel, And Le·viʹa·than, which you formed to play in it.
27 All of them wait for you To give them their food in its season.
28 What you give them, they gather. When you open your hand, they are satisfied with good things.
29 When you hide your face, they are disturbed. If you take away their spirit, they die and return to the dust.
30 If you send out your spirit, they are created, And you renew the surface of the ground.
31 The glory of Jehovah will last forever. Jehovah will rejoice in his works.
32 He looks at the earth, and it trembles; He touches the mountains, and they smoke.
33 I will sing to Jehovah throughout my life; I will sing praises to my God as long as I live.
34 Let my thoughts be pleasing to him. I will rejoice in Jehovah.
35 The sinners will vanish from the earth, And the wicked will no longer exist. Let me praise Jehovah. Praise Jah!
105 Give thanks to Jehovah, call on his name, Make his deeds known among the peoples!
2 Sing to him, sing praises to him, Ponder over all his wonderful works.
3 Boast about his holy name. Let the hearts of those seeking Jehovah rejoice.
4 Search for Jehovah and his strength. Seek his face constantly.
5 Remember the wonderful works he has performed, His miracles and the judgments he has pronounced,
6 You offspring of Abraham his servant, You sons of Jacob, his chosen ones.
7 He is Jehovah our God. His judgments are throughout the earth.
8 He remembers his covenant forever, The promise he made, to a thousand generations,
9 The covenant he made with Abraham, And the oath he swore to Isaac,
10 Which he established as a decree to Jacob And as a lasting covenant to Israel,
11 Saying, “I will give you the land of Caʹnaan As your allotted inheritance.”
12 This was when they were few in number, Yes, very few, and they were foreigners in the land.
13 They walked about from nation to nation, From one kingdom to another people.
14 He did not allow any man to oppress them, But on their account he reproved kings,
15 Saying, “Do not touch my anointed ones, And to my prophets do nothing bad.”
16 He called down a famine on the land; He cut off their supply of bread.
17 He sent ahead of them a man Who was sold to be a slave, Joseph.
18 With fetters they bound his feet, His neck was put in irons;
19 Until the time that his word proved true, The saying of Jehovah is what refined him.
20 The king sent to release him, The ruler of the peoples set him free.
21 He made him master of his household, Ruler over all his property,
22 To have authority over his princes as he pleased And to teach his elders wisdom.
23 Then Israel came into Egypt, And Jacob lived as a foreigner in the land of Ham.
24 God made his people very fruitful; He made them mightier than their adversaries,
25 Whose hearts he let change to hate his people, To plot against his servants.
26 He sent his servant Moses, And Aaron, whom he had chosen.
27 They performed his signs among them, His miracles in the land of Ham.
28 He sent darkness and the land became dark; They did not rebel against his words.
29 He changed their waters into blood And killed their fish.
30 Their land swarmed with frogs, Even in the royal chambers.
31 He ordered the gadflies to invade And gnats in all their territories.
32 He turned their rain to hail And sent lightning on their land.
33 He struck their vines and their fig trees And shattered the trees of their territory.
34 He said that the locusts should invade, Young locusts without number.
35 They devoured all the vegetation in the land, And they devoured the produce of the ground.
36 Then he struck down every firstborn in their land, The beginning of their procreative power.
37 He brought his people out with silver and gold; And no one among his tribes stumbled.
38 Egypt rejoiced when they left, For the dread of Israel had fallen on them.
39 He spread a cloud to screen them off And fire to give light by night.
40 They asked, and he brought quail; He kept satisfying them with bread from heaven.
41 He opened a rock, and waters flowed out; These flowed through the desert like a river.
42 For he remembered the holy promise he had made to Abraham his servant.
43 So he brought out his people with exultation, His chosen ones with a joyful cry.
44 He gave them the lands of nations; They inherited what other peoples had worked hard to produce,
45 So that they would keep his decrees And observe his laws. Praise Jah!
106 Praise Jah! Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good; His loyal love endures forever.
2 Who can fully declare Jehovah’s mighty acts Or proclaim all his praiseworthy deeds?
3 Happy are those who act with justice, Who always do what is right.
4 Remember me, O Jehovah, when you show favor toward your people. Take care of me with your acts of salvation,
5 So that I may enjoy the goodness you show your chosen ones, That I may rejoice along with your nation, That I may proudly praise you along with your inheritance.
6 We have sinned just as our forefathers did; We have done wrong; we have acted wickedly.
7 Our forefathers in Egypt did not appreciate your wonderful works. They did not remember your abundant loyal love, But they rebelled at the sea, by the Red Sea.
8 But he saved them for the sake of his name, To make his mightiness known.
9 He rebuked the Red Sea, and it dried up; He led them through its depths as through a desert;
10 He saved them from the hand of their foe And reclaimed them from the hand of the enemy.
11 The waters covered their adversaries; Not one of them survived.
12 Then they had faith in his promise; They began to sing his praise.
13 But they quickly forgot what he did; They did not wait for his counsel.
14 They gave way to their selfish desires in the wilderness; They tested God in the desert.
15 He gave them what they requested, But then struck them with disease that made them waste away.
16 In the camp they grew jealous of Moses And of Aaron, the holy one of Jehovah.
17 The earth then opened up and swallowed Daʹthan And covered those assembled with A·biʹram.
18 A fire blazed among their group; A flame consumed the wicked.
19 They made a calf in Hoʹreb And bowed down to a statue of metal;
20 They exchanged my glory For the representation of a grass-eating bull.
21 They forgot God their Savior, Who did great things in Egypt,
22 Wonderful works in the land of Ham, Awe-inspiring deeds at the Red Sea.
23 He was about to order their annihilation, But Moses his chosen one interceded with him To avert his destructive anger.
24 Then they despised the desirable land; They had no faith in his promise.
25 They kept grumbling in their tents; They did not listen to the voice of Jehovah.
26 So he raised his hand in an oath concerning them That he would make them fall in the wilderness;
27 He would make their descendants fall among the nations, And he would scatter them throughout the lands.
28 Then they joined in worship of Baʹal of Peʹor, And they ate sacrifices offered to the dead.
29 They provoked Him by their actions, And a scourge broke out among them.
30 But when Phinʹe·has stood up and intervened, The scourge was halted.
31 And it was counted to him as righteousness Through all generations forever.
32 They provoked Him at the waters of Merʹi·bah, And it went badly for Moses because of them.
33 They embittered his spirit, And he spoke rashly with his lips.
34 They did not annihilate the peoples, As Jehovah had commanded them.
35 But they mingled with the nations And adopted their ways.
36 They kept serving their idols, And these became a snare to them.
37 They would sacrifice their sons And their daughters to demons.
38 They kept spilling innocent blood, The blood of their own sons and daughters Whom they sacrificed to the idols of Caʹnaan; And the land was polluted with bloodshed.
39 They became unclean by their works; They committed spiritual prostitution by their deeds.
40 So the anger of Jehovah blazed against his people, And he grew to detest his inheritance.
41 He repeatedly handed them over to the nations, So that those who hated them might rule over them.
42 Their enemies oppressed them, And they were subject to their power.
43 Many times he rescued them, But they would rebel and disobey, And they would be brought low for their error.
44 But he would see their distress And hear their cry for help.
45 For their sake he would remember his covenant, And he would feel pity, moved by his great loyal love.
46 He would cause them to be pitied By all who held them captive.
47 Save us, O Jehovah our God, And gather us from the nations So that we may give thanks to your holy name And exult in praising you.
48 May Jehovah, the God of Israel, be praised Throughout all eternity. And let all the people say, “Amen!” Praise Jah!
BOOK FIVE (Psalms 107-150) 107 Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good; His loyal love endures forever.
2 Let those reclaimed by Jehovah say this, Those whom he reclaimed from the hand of the adversary,
3 Whom he gathered together from the lands, From the east and from the west, From the north and from the south.
4 They wandered about in the wilderness, in the desert; They did not find a way to a city where they could live.
5 They were hungry and thirsty; They were faint from exhaustion.
6 They kept crying out to Jehovah in their distress; He rescued them from their plight.
7 He had them walk in the right way To come to a city where they could live.
8 Let people give thanks to Jehovah for his loyal love And for his wonderful works in behalf of the sons of men.
9 For he has satisfied the thirsty And filled the hungry with good things.
10 Some were living in deepest darkness, Prisoners in affliction and in irons.
11 For they had rebelled against the word of God; They disrespected the counsel of the Most High.
12 So he humbled their hearts through hardship; They stumbled, and there was no one to help them.
13 They called to Jehovah for help in their distress; He saved them from their plight.
14 He brought them out of deepest darkness, And he tore off their shackles.
15 Let people give thanks to Jehovah for his loyal love And for his wonderful works in behalf of the sons of men.
16 For he has broken down the doors of copper And cut through the bars of iron.
17 They were foolish and suffered affliction On account of their transgressions and their errors.
18 They lost their appetite for all food; They drew near the gates of death.
19 They would call to Jehovah for help in their distress; He would save them from their plight.
20 He would send his word and heal them And rescue them from the pits they were trapped in.
21 Let people give thanks to Jehovah for his loyal love And for his wonderful works in behalf of the sons of men.
22 Let them offer the sacrifices of thanksgiving And declare his works with a joyful cry.
23 Those who travel on the sea in ships, Who ply their trade over the vast waters,
24 They have seen the works of Jehovah And his wonderful works in the deep;
25 How by his word a windstorm arises, Lifting up the waves of the sea.
26 They rise up to the sky; They plunge down to the depths. Their courage melts away because of the impending calamity.
27 They reel and stagger like a drunken man, And all their skill proves useless.
28 Then they cry out to Jehovah in their distress, And he rescues them from their plight.
29 He calms the windstorm; The waves of the sea grow quiet.
30 They rejoice when these grow still, And he leads them to their desired harbor.
31 Let people give thanks to Jehovah for his loyal love And for his wonderful works in behalf of the sons of men.
32 Let them exalt him in the congregation of the people, And let them praise him in the council of the elders.
33 He turns rivers into a desert And springs of water into parched ground,
34 Fruitful land into salty wasteland, Because of the wickedness of those dwelling in it.
35 He turns the desert into reedy pools of water, And dry land into springs of water.
36 He causes the hungry to dwell there, So that they may establish a city where they can live.
37 They sow fields and plant vineyards That yield fruitful crops.
38 He blesses them and they increase greatly; He does not let their cattle diminish.
39 But again they become few and are humiliated Because of oppression, calamity, and grief.
40 He pours out contempt upon nobles And makes them wander in trackless wastelands.
41 But he protects the poor from oppression And makes their families as numerous as a flock.
42 The upright see this and rejoice; But all the unrighteous shut their mouths.
43 Whoever is wise will observe these things And will carefully consider Jehovah’s acts of loyal love.
A song. A melody of David. 108 My heart is steadfast, O God. I will sing and make music with my whole being.
2 Do awake, O stringed instrument; you too, O harp. I will awaken the dawn.
3 I will praise you among the peoples, O Jehovah, And I will sing praises to you among the nations.
4 For your loyal love is great, as high as the heavens, And your faithfulness, up to the skies.
5 Be exalted above the heavens, O God; May your glory be over all the earth.
6 So that your loved ones may be rescued, Save us with your right hand and answer me.
7 God has spoken in his holiness: “I will exult, I will give out Sheʹchem as an inheritance, And I will measure off the Valley of Sucʹcoth.
8 Gilʹe·ad belongs to me, as does Ma·nasʹseh, And Eʹphra·im is the helmet for my head; Judah is my commander’s staff.
9 Moʹab is my washbasin. Over Eʹdom I will throw my sandal. Over Phi·lisʹti·a I will shout in triumph.”
10 Who will bring me to the fortified city? Who will lead me as far as Eʹdom?
11 Is it not you, O God, who have rejected us, Our God, who no longer goes out with our armies?
12 Help us in our distress, For salvation by humans is worthless.
13 By God we will gain power, And he will trample on our adversaries.
To the director. Of David. A melody. 109 O God whom I praise, do not remain silent.
2 For the wicked and the deceitful open their mouths against me. They speak about me with lying tongues;
3 They surround me with hateful words, And they attack me without cause.
4 They resist me in response to my love; But I continue to pray.
5 They repay me with bad for good And hatred for my love.
6 Appoint a wicked man over him; May a resister stand at his right hand.
7 When he is judged, may he be found guilty; May even his prayer be counted as a sin.
8 Let his days be few; His office of oversight let someone else take.
9 Let his children become fatherless, And his wife, a widow.
10 May his children become wandering beggars, Foraging for food from their ruined homes.
11 May his creditor seize all that he has, And may strangers plunder his possessions.
12 May no one extend kindness to him, And may no one show favor to his fatherless children.
13 Let his descendants be cut off; May their name be erased within a generation.
14 Let the error of his forefathers be remembered by Jehovah, And may the sin of his mother not be erased.
15 May Jehovah always be mindful of what they have done; And may he cut off the memory of them from the earth.
16 For he did not remember to show kindness, But he kept pursuing the oppressed, poor, and brokenhearted man To put him to death.
17 He loved to pronounce a curse, so that is what came upon him; He had no desire to bless, so he received no blessing.
18 He was clothed with curses as his garment. And they were poured into his body like water, Into his bones like oil.
19 May his curses be like the clothing in which he wraps himself And like a belt he always wears.
20 This is the payment from Jehovah for the one who resists me And for those who speak evil things against me.
21 But you, Jehovah the Sovereign Lord, Act in my behalf for the sake of your name. Rescue me, because your loyal love is good.
22 For I am helpless and poor, And my heart has been pierced within me.
23 I am passing away like a fading shadow; I have been shaken off like a locust.
24 My knees give way from fasting; My body is thin, and I am wasting away.
25 I have become the object of their taunts. When they see me, they shake their heads.
26 Help me, O Jehovah my God; Save me by your loyal love.
27 May they know that this is by your hand; That you, O Jehovah, have done it.
28 Let them pronounce a curse, but may you give a blessing. When they rise up against me, may they be put to shame, But let your servant rejoice.
29 Let those who resist me be clothed with humiliation; May they be wrapped in their shame as in a robe.
30 My mouth will fervently praise Jehovah; I will praise him in front of many people.
31 For he will stand at the right hand of the poor To save him from those who condemn him.
Of David. A melody. 110 Jehovah declared to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand Until I place your enemies as a stool for your feet.”
2 Jehovah will extend the scepter of your power out of Zion, saying: “Go subduing in the midst of your enemies.”
3 Your people will offer themselves willingly on the day of your military force. In splendid holiness, from the womb of the dawn, You have your company of young men just like dewdrops.
4 Jehovah has sworn an oath, and he will not change his mind: “You are a priest forever In the manner of Mel·chizʹe·dek!”
5 Jehovah will be at your right hand; He will crush kings on the day of his anger.
6 He will execute judgment against the nations; He will fill the land with dead bodies. He will crush the leader of a vast land.
7 He will drink from the stream along the road. Therefore, he will hold his head high.
111 Praise Jah!  I will praise Jehovah with all my heart  In the assembled group of upright ones and in the congregation.
2 The works of Jehovah are great;  They are studied by all those finding pleasure in them.
3 His activity is glorious and splendid,  And his righteousness endures forever.
4 He causes his wonderful works to be remembered.  Jehovah is compassionate and merciful.
5 Food he gives to those fearing him.  He remembers his covenant forever.
6 He has revealed to his people his powerful works  By giving them the inheritance of the nations.
7 The works of his hands are truth and justice;  Trustworthy are all his orders.
8 They are always reliable, now and forever;  They are made in truth and righteousness.
9 He has given redemption to his people.  He commanded that his covenant should last forever.  His name is holy and awe-inspiring.
10 The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom.  All those observing his orders show good insight.  His praise endures forever.
112 Praise Jah!  Happy is the man who fears Jehovah,  Who takes great pleasure in his commandments.
2 His descendants will be mighty in the earth,  And the generation of the upright will be blessed.
3 Wealth and riches are in his house,  And his righteousness continues forever.
4 To the upright he shines like a light in the darkness.  He is compassionate and merciful and righteous.
5 It goes well for the man who generously lends.  He conducts his affairs with justice.
6 He will never be shaken.  The righteous will be remembered forever.
7 He will not fear bad news.  His heart is steadfast, trusting in Jehovah.
8 His heart is unshakable; he is not afraid;  In the end he will look in triumph on his adversaries.
9 He has distributed widely; he has given to the poor.  His righteousness continues forever.  His own strength will be exalted with glory.
10 The wicked one will see and be upset.  He will grind his teeth and melt away.  The desires of the wicked will perish.
113 Praise Jah! Offer praise, you servants of Jehovah, Praise the name of Jehovah.
2 May Jehovah’s name be praised From now on and forever.
3 From the rising of the sun to its setting, Let Jehovah’s name be praised.
4 Jehovah is high above all the nations; His glory is above the heavens.
5 Who is like Jehovah our God, The one who dwells on high?
6 He stoops down to look on heaven and earth,
7 Raising the lowly from the dust. He lifts up the poor from the ash heap
8 In order to make him sit with nobles, With the nobles of his people.
9 He gives the barren woman a home As a happy mother with children. Praise Jah!
114 When Israel went out of Egypt, The house of Jacob from a people speaking a foreign language,
2 Judah became his sanctuary, Israel, his dominion.
3 The sea saw it and fled; The Jordan turned back.
4 The mountains skipped about like rams, The hills, like lambs.
5 What made you flee, O sea? Why, O Jordan, did you turn back?
6 Why did you skip about like rams, O mountains, Like lambs, O hills?
7 Tremble, O earth, because of the Lord, Because of the God of Jacob,
8 Who turns the rock into a reedy pool of water, The flinty rock into springs of water.
115 Not to us, O Jehovah, not to us, But to your name give glory Because of your loyal love and your faithfulness.
2 Why should the nations say: “Where is their God?”
3 Our God is in the heavens; He does whatever he pleases.
4 Their idols are silver and gold, The work of human hands.
5 A mouth they have, but they cannot speak; Eyes, but they cannot see;
6 Ears they have, but they cannot hear; A nose, but they cannot smell;
7 Hands they have, but they cannot feel; Feet, but they cannot walk; They make no sound with their throat.
8 The people who make them will become just like them, As will all those who trust in them.
9 O Israel, trust in Jehovah —He is their help and their shield.
10 O house of Aaron, trust in Jehovah —He is their help and their shield.
11 You who fear Jehovah, trust in Jehovah —He is their help and their shield.
12 Jehovah remembers us and will bless; He will bless the house of Israel; He will bless the house of Aaron.
13 He will bless those who fear Jehovah, The small as well as the great.
14 Jehovah will give you an increase, To you and your children.
15 May you be blessed by Jehovah, The Maker of heaven and earth.
16 As for the heavens, they belong to Jehovah, But the earth he has given to the sons of men.
17 The dead do not praise Jah; Nor do any who go down into the silence of death.
18 But we will praise Jah From now on and forever. Praise Jah!
116 I love Jehovah Because he hears my voice, my pleas for help.
2 For he inclines his ear to me, And I will call on him as long as I live.
3 The ropes of death encircled me; The Grave had me in its grip. I was overcome by distress and grief.
4 But I called on the name of Jehovah: “O Jehovah, rescue me!”
5 Jehovah is compassionate and righteous; Our God is merciful.
6 Jehovah is guarding the inexperienced. I was brought low, and he saved me.
7 Let my soul rest once again, For Jehovah has dealt kindly with me.
8 You have rescued me from death, My eye from tears, my foot from stumbling.
9 I will walk before Jehovah in the land of the living.
10 I had faith, for I spoke; I was greatly afflicted.
11 As for me, I panicked and said: “Every man is a liar.”
12 With what will I repay Jehovah For all the good he has done for me?
13 I will take up the cup of salvation, And I will call on the name of Jehovah.
14 I will pay my vows to Jehovah In the presence of all his people.
15 Costly in the eyes of Jehovah Is the death of his loyal ones.
16 I beg you, O Jehovah, For I am your servant. I am your servant, the son of your slave girl. You have freed me from my bonds.
17 I will offer to you the sacrifice of thanksgiving; I will call on the name of Jehovah.
18 I will pay my vows to Jehovah In the presence of all his people,
19 In the courtyards of the house of Jehovah, In your midst, O Jerusalem. Praise Jah!
117 Praise Jehovah, all you nations; Glorify him, all you peoples.
2 For his loyal love toward us is great; The faithfulness of Jehovah endures forever. Praise Jah!
118 Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good; His loyal love endures forever.
2 Let Israel now say: “His loyal love endures forever.”
3 Let those of the house of Aaron now say: “His loyal love endures forever.”
4 Let those fearing Jehovah now say: “His loyal love endures forever.”
5 I called on Jah in my distress; Jah answered and brought me into a place of safety.
6 Jehovah is on my side; I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?
7 Jehovah is on my side as my helper; I will look in triumph on those who hate me.
8 It is better to take refuge in Jehovah Than to trust in humans.
9 It is better to take refuge in Jehovah Than to trust in princes.
10 All the nations surrounded me, But in the name of Jehovah, I warded them off.
11 They surrounded me, yes, I was completely surrounded, But in the name of Jehovah, I warded them off.
12 They surrounded me like bees, But they were extinguished as quickly as a fire among thorns. In the name of Jehovah, I warded them off.
13 I was pushed hard to make me fall, But Jehovah helped me.
14 Jah is my shelter and my strength, And he has become my salvation.
15 The sound of rejoicing and salvation Is in the tents of the righteous. The right hand of Jehovah is demonstrating its power.
16 The right hand of Jehovah is exalting itself; The right hand of Jehovah is demonstrating its power.
17 I will not die, no, I will live, In order to declare the works of Jah.
18 Jah disciplined me severely, But he did not hand me over to death.
19 Open to me the gates of righteousness; I will enter them and praise Jah.
20 This is the gate of Jehovah. The righteous will enter through it.
21 I will praise you, for you answered me And you became my salvation.
22 The stone that the builders rejected Has become the chief cornerstone.
23 This has come from Jehovah; It is wonderful in our eyes.
24 This is the day that Jehovah has made; We will be joyful and rejoice in it.
25 Jehovah, save us, please, we beg! Jehovah, grant us victory, please!
26 Blessed is the one who comes in the name of Jehovah; We bless you from the house of Jehovah.
27 Jehovah is God; He gives us light. Join in the festival procession with branches in hand, Up to the horns of the altar.
28 You are my God, and I will praise you; My God, I will exalt you.
29 Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good; His loyal love endures forever.
119 Happy are those who are blameless in their way, Who walk in the law of Jehovah.
2 Happy are those who observe his reminders, Who search for him with all their heart.
3 They practice no unrighteousness; They walk in his ways.
4 You have commanded That your orders be carefully kept.
5 If only I could remain steadfast So as to observe your regulations!
6 Then I would not be put to shame When I consider all your commandments.
7 I will praise you with an upright heart When I learn your righteous judgments.
8 I will observe your regulations. May you never utterly forsake me.
9 How can a young man keep his path clean? By keeping on guard according to your word.
10 With my whole heart I seek you. Do not let me stray from your commandments.
11 In my heart I treasure up your saying So that I may not sin against you.
12 May you be praised, O Jehovah; Teach me your regulations.
13 With my lips I declare All the judgments that you have spoken.
14 I rejoice over your reminders More than over all other valuable things.
15 I will ponder over your orders And keep my eyes on your paths.
16 I am fond of your statutes. I will not forget your word.
17 Deal kindly with your servant, So that I may live and observe your word.
18 Open my eyes so that I may see clearly The wonderful things from your law.
19 I am but a foreigner in the land. Do not hide your commandments from me.
20 I am consumed with longing For your judgments at all times.
21 You rebuke the presumptuous, The cursed ones who stray from your commandments.
22 Remove from me scorn and contempt, For I have observed your reminders.
23 Even when princes sit together and speak against me, Your servant ponders over your regulations.
24 I am fond of your reminders; They are my advisers.
25 I lie prostrate in the dust. Preserve me alive according to your word.
26 I told you of my ways, and you answered me; Teach me your regulations.
27 Make me understand the meaning of your orders, So that I may ponder over your wonderful works.
28 I have been sleepless from grief. Strengthen me according to your word.
29 Remove from me the way of deception, And favor me with your law.
30 The way of faithfulness I have chosen. I recognize that your judgments are right.
31 I cling to your reminders. O Jehovah, do not let me be disappointed.
32 I will eagerly pursue the way of your commandments Because you make room for it in my heart.
33 Teach me, O Jehovah, the way of your regulations, And I will follow it to the end.
34 Give me understanding, So that I may observe your law And keep it with my whole heart.
35 Guide me in the pathway of your commandments, For in it I take delight.
36 Incline my heart to your reminders, Not to selfish gain.
37 Turn my eyes away from looking at what is worthless; Preserve me alive in your way.
38 Fulfill your promise to your servant, So that you may be feared.
39 Remove the disgrace that I dread, For your judgments are good.
40 See how I long for your orders. Preserve me alive in your righteousness.
41 May I experience your loyal love, O Jehovah, Your salvation in harmony with your promise;
42 Then I will reply to the one taunting me, For I put my trust in your word.
43 Do not utterly remove the word of truth from my mouth, For I have hoped in your judgment.
44 I will keep your law constantly, Forever and ever.
45 And I will walk about in a place of safety, For I search for your orders.
46 I will speak about your reminders in front of kings, And I will not be ashamed.
47 I am fond of your commandments, Yes, I love them.
48 I will raise my hands to your commandments, which I love, And I will ponder over your regulations.
49 Remember your word to your servant, Through which you give me hope.
50 This is my comfort in my affliction, For your saying has preserved me alive.
51 The presumptuous utterly scorn me, But I do not deviate from your law.
52 I remember your judgments from of old, O Jehovah, And I find comfort in them.
53 I am seized with burning rage because of the wicked, Who forsake your law.
54 Your regulations are songs to me Wherever I dwell.
55 During the night I remember your name, O Jehovah, So that I may keep your law.
56 This has been my practice Because I have observed your orders.
57 Jehovah is my portion; I have promised to keep your words.
58 I appeal to you with all my heart; Show me favor according to your promise.
59 I have examined my ways, In order to turn my feet back to your reminders.
60 I hurry and do not delay To keep your commandments.
61 The ropes of the wicked surround me, But your law I do not forget.
62 At midnight I get up to give you thanks For your righteous judgments.
63 I am a friend of all who fear you And of those who keep your orders.
64 Your loyal love, O Jehovah, fills the earth; Teach me your regulations.
65 You have dealt well with your servant, O Jehovah, according to your word.
66 Teach me good sense and knowledge, For I have put my trust in your commandments.
67 Before I was afflicted, I used to go astray, But now I keep your saying.
68 You are good and your works are good. Teach me your regulations.
69 The presumptuous smear me with lies, But I observe your orders with all my heart.
70 Their heart is insensitive, But I am fond of your law.
71 It is good that I have been afflicted, So that I may learn your regulations.
72 The law that you have proclaimed is good for me, More so than thousands of pieces of gold and silver.
73 Your hands made me and formed me. Give me understanding, So that I may learn your commandments.
74 Those who fear you see me and rejoice, For your word is my hope.
75 I know, O Jehovah, that your judgments are righteous And that you have afflicted me in your faithfulness.
76 May your loyal love please comfort me, According to the promise you made to your servant.
77 Show me mercy, so that I may keep living, For I am fond of your law.
78 May the presumptuous be put to shame, For they wrong me without cause. But I will ponder over your orders.
79 Let those who fear you return to me, Those who know your reminders.
80 May my heart be blameless in following your regulations, So that I may not be put to shame.
81 I long for your salvation, For your word is my hope.
82 My eyes long for your saying While I say: “When will you comfort me?”
83 For I am like a skin bottle dried up in the smoke, But your regulations I do not forget.
84 How many days must your servant wait? When will you bring judgment against those persecuting me?
85 The presumptuous dig pits for me, Those who defy your law.
86 All your commandments are trustworthy. Men persecute me without cause; help me!
87 They almost exterminated me from the earth, But I did not abandon your orders.
88 Preserve me alive because of your loyal love, So that I may keep the reminders you have spoken.
89 Forever, O Jehovah, Your word will remain in the heavens.
90 Your faithfulness is through all generations. You have firmly established the earth, so that it continues to stand.
91 By your judgments they remain until today, For they are all your servants.
92 If I had not been fond of your law, I would have perished in my affliction.
93 I will never forget your orders, Because by them you have preserved me alive.
94 I belong to you; save me, Because I have searched for your orders.
95 The wicked wait to destroy me, But I give close attention to your reminders.
96 I have seen a limit to all perfection, But your commandment has no limit.
97 How I do love your law! I ponder over it all day long.
98 Your commandment makes me wiser than my enemies, Because it is with me forever.
99 I have more insight than all my teachers, Because I ponder over your reminders.
100 I act with more understanding than older men, Because I observe your orders.
101 I refuse to walk on any evil path, So that I may keep your word.
102 I do not turn aside from your judgments, For you have instructed me.
103 How sweet your sayings are to my palate, More so than honey to my mouth!
104 By your orders I act with understanding. That is why I hate every false path.
105 Your word is a lamp to my foot, And a light for my path.
106 I have sworn an oath, and I will carry it out, To observe your righteous judgments.
107 I have been greatly afflicted. O Jehovah, preserve me alive according to your word.
108 Please take pleasure in my voluntary offerings of praise, O Jehovah, And teach me your judgments.
109 My life is in constant danger, But I have not forgotten your law.
110 The wicked have set a trap for me, But I have not strayed from your orders.
111 I take your reminders as my permanent possession, For they are the joy of my heart.
112 I have resolved to obey your regulations At all times, down to the last.
113 I hate the halfhearted ones, But I love your law.
114 You are my shelter and my shield, For your word is my hope.
115 Stay away from me, you evil men, So that I may observe the commandments of my God.
116 Support me as you promised, So that I may keep living; Do not let my hope turn into disappointment.
117 Support me that I may be saved; Then I will always concentrate on your regulations.
118 You reject all those who stray from your regulations, For they are false and deceitful.
119 You discard all the wicked of the earth as if they were worthless dross. That is why I love your reminders.
120 The dread of you makes my body tremble; I am in fear of your judgments.
121 I have done what is just and righteous. Do not abandon me to my oppressors!
122 Guarantee the welfare of your servant; May the presumptuous not oppress me.
123 My eyes have grown weary waiting for your salvation And for your righteous promise.
124 Show your loyal love to your servant, And teach me your regulations.
125 I am your servant; give me understanding, So that I may know your reminders.
126 The time has come for Jehovah to act, For they have broken your law.
127 That is why I love your commandments More than gold, even fine gold.
128 Therefore, I consider every instruction from you to be right; I hate every false path.
129 Your reminders are wonderful. That is why I observe them.
130 The disclosure of your words brings light, Giving understanding to the inexperienced.
131 I open my mouth wide and sigh, Because I long for your commandments.
132 Turn to me and show me favor, In keeping with your judgment toward those loving your name.
133 Guide my steps safely by your saying; May nothing wicked dominate me.
134 Rescue me from oppressive men, And I will keep your orders.
135 Make your face shine upon your servant, And teach me your regulations.
136 Tears stream down from my eyes Because people do not keep your law.
137 You are righteous, O Jehovah, And your judgments are fair.
138 The reminders you give are righteous And completely reliable.
139 My zeal consumes me, Because my adversaries have forgotten your words.
140 Your saying is thoroughly refined, And your servant loves it.
141 I am insignificant and despised; Yet, I have not forgotten your orders.
142 Your righteousness is an eternal righteousness, And your law is truth.
143 Though distress and difficulty come upon me, I remain fond of your commandments.
144 The righteousness of your reminders is eternal. Give me understanding, so that I may keep living.
145 I call with my whole heart. Answer me, O Jehovah. Your regulations I will observe.
146 I call on you; save me! I will keep your reminders.
147 I have been awake before dawn to cry for help, For your words are my hope.
148 My eyes open before the night watches, So that I can ponder over your saying.
149 Do listen to my voice because of your loyal love. O Jehovah, preserve me alive according to your justice.
150 Those who engage in shameful conduct come near; They are far away from your law.
151 You are near, O Jehovah, And all your commandments are truth.
152 Long ago I learned about your reminders, That you have established them to last forever.
153 Look on my affliction and rescue me, For I have not forgotten your law.
154 Defend me and rescue me; Preserve me alive in harmony with your promise.
155 Salvation is far away from the wicked, For they have not searched for your regulations.
156 Your mercy is great, O Jehovah. Preserve me alive in harmony with your justice.
157 My persecutors and my adversaries are many; But I have not deviated from your reminders.
158 I look on the treacherous with loathing, Because they do not keep your saying.
159 See how I love your orders! O Jehovah, preserve me alive because of your loyal love.
160 The very essence of your word is truth, And all your righteous judgments endure forever.  o
161 Princes persecute me for no cause, But my heart stands in awe of your words.
162 I rejoice over your saying Like someone who finds great spoil.
163 I hate falsehood—I detest it— I love your law.
164 Seven times a day I praise you Because of your righteous judgments.
165 Abundant peace belongs to those who love your law; Nothing can make them stumble.
166 I hope for your acts of salvation, O Jehovah, And I observe your commandments.
167 I keep your reminders, And I love them dearly.
168 I observe your orders and your reminders, For you are aware of all that I do.
169 May my cry for help reach you, O Jehovah. According to your word, make me understand.
170 May my request for favor come before you. Save me, as you have promised.
171 May my lips overflow with praise, For you teach me your regulations.
172 May my tongue sing about your saying, For all your commandments are righteous.
173 May your hand be ready to help me, Because I choose to obey your orders.
174 I long for your salvation, O Jehovah, And I am fond of your law.
175 Let me live so that I may praise you; May your judgments be my help.
176 I have strayed like a lost sheep. Search for your servant, For I have not forgotten your commandments.
A Song of the Ascents. 120 I called to Jehovah in my distress, And he answered me.
2 O Jehovah, rescue me from lying lips And from the deceitful tongue.
3 What will He do to you, and how will He punish you, You deceitful tongue?
4 With sharp arrows of a warrior And burning coals of broomwood.
5 Woe to me, for I have lived as a foreigner in Meʹshech! I have been dwelling among the tents of Keʹdar.
6 I have been dwelling far too long With those who hate peace.
7 I am for peace, but when I speak, They are for war.
A Song of the Ascents. 121 I raise my eyes to the mountains. From where will my help come?
2 My help comes from Jehovah, The Maker of heaven and earth.
3 He will never allow your foot to slip. The One guarding you will never be drowsy.
4 Look! He will never be drowsy nor go to sleep, The One guarding Israel.
5 Jehovah is guarding you. Jehovah is the shade at your right hand.
6 By day the sun will not strike you, Nor the moon by night.
7 Jehovah will guard you against all harm. He will guard your life.
8 Jehovah will guard you in all you do From now on and forever.
A Song of the Ascents. Of David. 122 I rejoiced when they said to me: “Let us go to the house of Jehovah.”
2 And now our feet are standing Within your gates, O Jerusalem.
3 Jerusalem is built as a city That is joined together as one.
4 The tribes have gone up to it, The tribes of Jah, According to the reminder to Israel, To give thanks to the name of Jehovah.
5 For thrones for judgment were set up there, Thrones of the house of David.
6 Ask for the peace of Jerusalem. Those who love you, O city, will be secure.
7 May peace continue within your ramparts, Security within your fortified towers.
8 For the sake of my brothers and my companions I will say: “May there be peace within you.”
9 For the sake of the house of Jehovah our God, I will seek good for you.
A Song of the Ascents. 123 To you I raise my eyes, You who are enthroned in the heavens.
2 As the eyes of servants look to the hand of their master, And the eyes of a servant girl to the hand of her mistress, So our eyes look to Jehovah our God Until he shows us favor.
3 Show us favor, O Jehovah, show us favor, For we have had our full share of contempt.
4 We have had our full share of ridicule from the self-assured And the contempt of the arrogant.
A Song of the Ascents. Of David. 124 “If Jehovah had not been with us” —Let Israel now say—
2 “If Jehovah had not been with us When men rose up to attack us,
3 Then they would have swallowed us up alive When their anger was burning against us.
4 Then the waters would have washed us away, The torrent would have swept over us.
5 The raging waters would have overwhelmed us.
6 May Jehovah be praised, For he has not given us as prey to their teeth.
7 We are like a bird that escaped From the hunter’s trap; The trap was broken, And we escaped.
8 Our help is in the name of Jehovah, The Maker of heaven and earth.”
A Song of the Ascents. 125 Those who trust in Jehovah Are like Mount Zion, which cannot be shaken But endures forever.
2 Just as mountains surround Jerusalem, So Jehovah surrounds his people From now on and forever.
3 The scepter of wickedness will not remain upon the land allotted to the righteous, So that the righteous do not turn to doing what is wrong.
4 Do good, O Jehovah, to those who are good, To those who are upright in heart.
5 As for those who turn aside to their crooked ways, Jehovah will remove them along with the wrongdoers. May there be peace upon Israel.
A Song of the Ascents. 126 When Jehovah gathered back the captives of Zion, We thought we were dreaming.
2 At that time our mouth was filled with laughter And our tongue with a joyful shout. At that time they said among the nations: “Jehovah has done great things for them.”
3 Jehovah has done great things for us, And we are overjoyed.
4 Do gather back our captives, O Jehovah, Like streams in the Negʹeb.
5 Those sowing seed with tears Will reap with a joyful shout.
6 The one who does go out, though weeping, Carrying his bag of seed, Will surely return with a joyful shout, Carrying in his sheaves.
A Song of the Ascents. Of Solomon. 127 Unless Jehovah builds the house, It is in vain that its builders work hard on it. Unless Jehovah guards the city, It is in vain that the guard stays awake.
2 It is in vain that you rise up early, That you stay up late, That you toil for your food, Since he provides for his loved ones while giving them sleep.
3 Look! Sons are an inheritance from Jehovah; The fruit of the womb is a reward.
4 Like arrows in the hand of a mighty man, So are the sons of one’s youth.
5 Happy is the man who fills his quiver with them. They will not be put to shame, For they will speak with enemies in the city gate.
A Song of the Ascents. 128 Happy is everyone who fears Jehovah, Who walks in His ways.
2 You will eat what your hands worked hard to produce. You will be happy and will enjoy prosperity.
3 Your wife will be like a fruitful vine within your house; Your sons will be like shoots of an olive tree around your table.
4 Look! That is how the man who fears Jehovah Will be blessed.
5 Jehovah will bless you from Zion. May you see Jerusalem prosper all the days of your life
6 And see the sons of your sons. May there be peace upon Israel.
A Song of the Ascents. 129 “Since my youth they have constantly attacked me” —Let Israel now say—
2 “Since my youth they have constantly attacked me; But they have not defeated me.
3 Plowmen have plowed across my back; They have made their furrows long.”
4 But Jehovah is righteous; He has cut up the ropes of the wicked.
5 They will be put to shame and will retreat in disgrace, All those who hate Zion.
6 They will become like grass on the rooftops That withers before it is pulled up,
7 That cannot fill the reaper’s hand Nor the arms of the one gathering sheaves.
8 Those passing by will not say: “May the blessing of Jehovah be upon you; We bless you in the name of Jehovah.”
A Song of the Ascents. 130 From the depths I call to you, O Jehovah.
2 O Jehovah, hear my voice. May your ears pay attention to my pleas for help.
3 If errors were what you watch, O Jah, Then who, O Jehovah, could stand?
4 For with you there is true forgiveness, So that you may be held in awe.
5 I hope in Jehovah, my whole being hopes in him; I wait for his word.
6 I eagerly wait for Jehovah, More than watchmen wait for the morning, Yes, more than watchmen wait for the morning.
7 Let Israel keep waiting for Jehovah, For Jehovah is loyal in his love, And he has great power to redeem.
8 He will redeem Israel from all their errors.
A Song of the Ascents. Of David. 131 O Jehovah, my heart is not haughty, Nor are my eyes lofty; Nor do I aspire to things too great, Or to things that are beyond me.
2 No, but I have calmed and quieted my soul Like a weaned child with its mother; I am contented like a weaned child.
3 Let Israel wait for Jehovah From now on and forever.
A Song of the Ascents. 132 O Jehovah, remember David And all his suffering;
2 How he swore to Jehovah, How he vowed to the Powerful One of Jacob:
3 “I will not go into my tent, my home. I will not lie upon my couch, my bed;
4 I will not allow my eyes to sleep, Nor my eyelids to slumber
5 Until I find a place for Jehovah, A fine residence for the Powerful One of Jacob.”
6 Look! We heard about it in Ephʹra·thah; We found it in the fields of the forest.
7 Let us come into his residence; Let us bow down at his footstool.
8 Rise up, O Jehovah, to come to your resting-place, You and the Ark of your strength.
9 May your priests be clothed with righteousness, And may your loyal ones shout joyfully.
10 For the sake of David your servant, Do not reject your anointed one.
11 Jehovah has sworn to David; He will surely not go back on his word: “One of your offspring, I will place on your throne.
12 If your sons keep my covenant And my reminders that I teach them, Their sons too Will sit on your throne forever.”
13 For Jehovah has chosen Zion; He has desired it for his dwelling place:
14 “This is my resting-place forever; Here I will dwell, for this is my desire.
15 I will richly bless it with provisions; I will satisfy its poor with bread.
16 Its priests I will clothe with salvation, And its loyal ones will shout joyfully.
17 There I will make the strength of David grow. I have prepared a lamp for my anointed one.
18 I will clothe his enemies with shame, But the crown on his head will flourish.”
A Song of the Ascents. Of David. 133 Look! How good and how pleasant it is For brothers to dwell together in unity!
2 It is like fine oil poured on the head That runs down the beard, Aaron’s beard, And runs down onto the collar of his garments.
3 It is like the dew of Herʹmon That descends on the mountains of Zion. That is where Jehovah decreed his blessing —Life everlasting.
A Song of the Ascents. 134 Praise Jehovah, All you servants of Jehovah, You who stand in the house of Jehovah during the nights.
2 Raise your hands in holiness And praise Jehovah.
3 May Jehovah, the Maker of heaven and earth, Bless you from Zion.
135 Praise Jah! Praise the name of Jehovah; Offer praise, you servants of Jehovah,
2 You who are standing in the house of Jehovah, In the courtyards of the house of our God.
3 Praise Jah, for Jehovah is good. Sing praises to his name, for it is pleasant.
4 For Jah has chosen Jacob for himself, Israel for his special property.
5 For I well know that Jehovah is great; Our Lord is greater than all other gods.
6 Jehovah does everything he pleases to do In heaven and on earth, in the seas and all the depths.
7 He causes clouds to ascend from the ends of the earth; He makes lightning for the rain; He brings the wind out of his storehouses.
8 He struck down the firstborn of Egypt, Both man and beast.
9 He sent signs and miracles among you, O Egypt, Against Pharʹaoh and all his servants.
10 He struck down many nations And killed mighty kings
11 —Siʹhon the king of the Amʹor·ites, Og the king of Baʹshan, And all the kingdoms of Caʹnaan.
12 He gave their land as an inheritance, An inheritance to Israel his people.
13 O Jehovah, your name endures forever. O Jehovah, your fame endures for all generations.
14 For Jehovah will defend his people, And he will feel compassion for his servants.
15 The idols of the nations are silver and gold, The work of human hands.
16 A mouth they have, but they cannot speak; Eyes, but they cannot see;
17 Ears they have, but they cannot hear. There is no breath in their mouth.
18 The people who make them will become just like them, As will all those who trust in them.
19 O house of Israel, praise Jehovah. O house of Aaron, praise Jehovah.
20 O house of Leʹvi, praise Jehovah. You who fear Jehovah, praise Jehovah.
21 May Jehovah be praised from Zion, The One residing in Jerusalem. Praise Jah!
136 Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good; His loyal love endures forever.
2 Give thanks to the God of gods, For his loyal love endures forever.
3 Give thanks to the Lord of lords, For his loyal love endures forever.
4 He alone does great wonders, For his loyal love endures forever.
5 He skillfully made the heavens, For his loyal love endures forever.
6 He spread out the earth over the waters, For his loyal love endures forever.
7 He made the great lights, For his loyal love endures forever,
8 The sun to rule over the day, For his loyal love endures forever,
9 The moon and the stars to rule over the night, For his loyal love endures forever.
10 He struck down Egypt’s firstborn, For his loyal love endures forever.
11 He brought Israel out from their midst, For his loyal love endures forever,
12 With a mighty hand and an outstretched arm, For his loyal love endures forever.
13 He split the Red Sea in two, For his loyal love endures forever.
14 He caused Israel to pass through the middle of it, For his loyal love endures forever.
15 He shook off Pharʹaoh and his army into the Red Sea, For his loyal love endures forever.
16 He led his people through the wilderness, For his loyal love endures forever.
17 He struck down great kings, For his loyal love endures forever.
18 He killed mighty kings, For his loyal love endures forever,
19 Siʹhon the king of the Amʹor·ites, For his loyal love endures forever,
20 And Og the king of Baʹshan, For his loyal love endures forever.
21 He gave their land as an inheritance, For his loyal love endures forever,
22 An inheritance to Israel his servant, For his loyal love endures forever.
23 He remembered us when we were low, For his loyal love endures forever.
24 He kept rescuing us from our adversaries, For his loyal love endures forever.
25 He gives food to every living thing, For his loyal love endures forever.
26 Give thanks to the God of the heavens, For his loyal love endures forever.
137 By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat. We wept when we remembered Zion.
2 Upon the poplar trees in her midst, We hung our harps.
3 For there our captors asked us for a song, Those mocking us wanted amusement: “Sing for us one of the songs of Zion.”
4 How can we sing the song of Jehovah On foreign soil?
5 If I should forget you, O Jerusalem, Let my right hand be forgetful.
6 Let my tongue stick to my palate If I do not remember you, If I do not place Jerusalem above My greatest reasons for rejoicing.
7 Remember, O Jehovah, What the Eʹdom·ites said on the day Jerusalem fell: “Tear it down! Tear it down to its foundations!”
8 O daughter of Babylon, who is soon to be devastated, Happy will be the one who rewards you With the treatment you inflicted on us.
9 Happy will be the one who seizes your children And dashes them against the rocks.
Of David. 138 I will praise you with all my heart. In the face of other gods, I will sing praises.
2 I will bow down toward your holy temple, And I will praise your name Because of your loyal love and your faithfulness. For you have magnified your saying and your name above everything else.
3 On the day I called, you answered me; You made me bold and strong.
4 All the kings of the earth will praise you, O Jehovah, For they will have heard the promises you have spoken.
5 They will sing about the ways of Jehovah, For the glory of Jehovah is great.
6 Though Jehovah is high, he takes note of the humble, But the haughty he knows only from a distance.
7 Even when I walk in the midst of danger, you will preserve me alive. You stretch out your hand against the anger of my enemies; Your right hand will save me.
8 Jehovah will accomplish all things in my behalf. O Jehovah, your loyal love endures forever; Do not forsake the works of your hands.
For the director. Of David. A melody. 139 O Jehovah, you have searched through me, and you know me.
2 You know when I sit down and when I rise up. You discern my thoughts from afar.
3 You observe me when I travel and when I lie down; You are familiar with all my ways.
4 There is not a word on my tongue, But look! O Jehovah, you already know it well.
5 Behind and before me, you surround me; And you lay your hand upon me.
6 Such knowledge is beyond my comprehension. It is too high for me to reach.
7 Where can I escape from your spirit, And where can I run away from your face?
8 If I were to ascend to heaven, you would be there, And if I were to make my bed in the Grave, look! you would be there.
9 If I would fly away with the wings of the dawn To reside by the most remote sea,
10 Even there your hand would lead me And your right hand would take hold of me.
11 If I say: “Surely darkness will conceal me!” Then the night around me would become light.
12 Even the darkness would not be too dark for you, But night would be as bright as the day; Darkness is the same as light to you.
13 For you produced my kidneys; You kept me screened off in my mother’s womb.
14 I praise you because in an awe-inspiring way I am wonderfully made. Your works are wonderful, I know this very well.
15 My bones were not hidden from you When I was made in secret, When I was woven in the depths of the earth.
16 Your eyes even saw me as an embryo; All its parts were written in your book Regarding the days when they were formed, Before any of them existed.
17 So to me, how precious your thoughts are! O God, how vast is the sum of them!
18 If I try to count them, they outnumber the grains of sand. When I awake, I am still with you.
19 O God, if only you would slay the wicked! Then the violent men would depart from me,
20 Those who say things against you with evil intent; They are your adversaries who take up your name in a worthless way.
21 Do I not hate those who hate you, O Jehovah, And loathe those who revolt against you?
22 I have nothing but hatred for them; They have become real enemies to me.
23 Search through me, O God, and know my heart. Examine me, and know my anxious thoughts.
24 See whether there is in me any harmful way, And lead me in the way of eternity.
For the director. A melody of David. 140 Rescue me, O Jehovah, from evil men; Protect me from violent men,
2 Those who scheme evil in their hearts And stir up conflict all day long.
3 They sharpen their tongue like that of a serpent; Venom of vipers is behind their lips. (Selah)
4 Protect me, O Jehovah, from the hands of the wicked; Safeguard me from violent men, Those who scheme to trip me.
5 The haughty ones hide a trap for me; With ropes they spread out a net beside the path. They set snares for me. (Selah)
6 I say to Jehovah: “You are my God. Listen, O Jehovah, to my pleas for help.”
7 O Jehovah the Sovereign Lord, my strong Savior, You shield my head in the day of battle.
8 Do not grant, O Jehovah, the desires of the wicked. Do not let their plots succeed, so that they are not exalted. (Selah)
9 May the heads of those surrounding me Be covered with the evil spoken by their lips.
10 May burning coals rain down on them. May they be hurled into the fire, Into deep pits, never to rise again.
11 May the slanderer find no place on the earth. May evil pursue men of violence and strike them down.
12 I know that Jehovah will defend the lowly And give justice to the poor.
13 Surely the righteous will give thanks to your name; The upright will dwell before your face.
A melody of David. 141 O Jehovah, I call on you. Come quickly to help me. Do pay attention when I call to you.
2 May my prayer be as incense prepared before you, My uplifted hands like the evening grain offering.
3 Station a guard for my mouth, O Jehovah, Do set a watch over the door of my lips.
4 Do not let my heart incline to anything bad, To share in vile deeds with evil men; May I never feast on their delicacies.
5 Should the righteous one strike me, it would be an act of loyal love; Should he reprove me, it would be like oil on my head, Which my head would never refuse. My prayer will continue even during their calamities.
6 Though their judges are thrown down from the cliff, The people will pay attention to my words, for they are pleasant.
7 Just as when someone plows and breaks up the soil, So our bones have been scattered at the mouth of the Grave.
8 But my eyes look to you, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah. In you I have taken refuge. Do not take away my life.
9 Protect me from the jaws of the trap they have laid for me, From the snares of evildoers.
10 The wicked will fall into their own nets all together While I pass by safely.
Masʹkil. Of David when he was in the cave. A prayer. 142 With my voice I call to Jehovah for help; With my voice I plead with Jehovah for favor.
2 Before him I pour out my concern; Before him I tell about my distress
3 When my spirit fails within me. Then you watch my roadway. In the path where I walk, They hide a trap for me.
4 Look at my right hand and see That no one cares about me. There is nowhere I can flee; No one is concerned about me.
5 I call to you, O Jehovah, for help. I say: “You are my refuge, All I have in the land of the living.”
6 Pay attention to my cry for help, For I have been brought very low. Rescue me from my persecutors, For they are stronger than I am.
7 Bring me out of the dungeon To praise your name. May the righteous gather around me Because you deal kindly with me.
A melody of David. 143 O Jehovah, hear my prayer; Listen to my plea for help. In your faithfulness and in your righteousness, answer me.
2 Do not enter into judgment with your servant, For no one living can be righteous before you.
3 For the enemy pursues me; He has crushed my life into the ground. He has caused me to dwell in darkness like those long dead.
4 My spirit is failing; My heart is numb within me.
5 I remember the days of old; I meditate on all your activity; I eagerly ponder over the work of your hands.
6 I spread out my hands to you; I am like a parched land that thirsts for you. (Selah)
7 Do answer me quickly, O Jehovah; My strength has come to an end. Do not hide your face from me, Or I will be like those going down into the pit.
8 Let me hear your loyal love in the morning, For I trust in you. Make known to me the way I should walk, For to you I turn.
9 Rescue me from my enemies, O Jehovah. I seek your protection.
10 Teach me to do your will, For you are my God. Your spirit is good; May it lead me on level ground.
11 For the sake of your name, O Jehovah, preserve me alive. In your righteousness, rescue me from distress.
12 In your loyal love, put an end to my enemies; Destroy all those harassing me, For I am your servant.
Of David. 144 May Jehovah, my Rock, be praised, Who trains my hands for battle, My fingers for warfare.
2 He is my loyal love and my stronghold, My secure refuge and my rescuer, My shield and the One in whom I have taken shelter, The One subduing peoples under me.
3 O Jehovah, what is man that you should notice him, The son of mortal man that you should pay attention to him?
4 Man resembles a mere breath; His days are like a passing shadow.
5 O Jehovah, lower your heavens and descend; Touch the mountains and make them smoke.
6 Make lightning flash and scatter the enemy; Shoot your arrows and throw them into confusion.
7 Stretch out your hands from above; Rescue me and save me from the surging waters, From the hand of the foreigners,
8 Whose mouths speak lies And who raise their right hand to swear to what is false.
9 O God, I will sing to you a new song. I will sing praises to you, accompanied by a ten-stringed instrument,
10 To the One who gives victory to kings, The One rescuing his servant David from the deadly sword.
11 Rescue me and save me from the hand of the foreigners, Whose mouths speak lies And who raise their right hand to swear to what is false.
12 Then our sons will be like young plants that grow up quickly, Our daughters like corner pillars carved for a palace.
13 Our storehouses will overflow with every kind of produce; Our flocks in our fields will multiply by the thousands, by the tens of thousands.
14 Our cattle, heavy with young, will suffer no mishap or miscarriage; There will be no cry of distress in our public squares.
15 Happy is the people for whom it is this way! Happy is the people whose God is Jehovah!
A praise of David.  145 I will exalt you, O my God the King, I will praise your name forever and ever.
2 All day long I will praise you; I will praise your name forever and ever.
3 Jehovah is great and most worthy of praise; His greatness is unsearchable.
4 Generation after generation will praise your works; They will tell about your mighty acts.
5 Of the glorious splendor of your majesty they will speak And on your wonderful works I will meditate.
6 They will speak about your awe-inspiring deeds, And I will declare your greatness.
7 They will bubble over as they recall your abundant goodness, And they will shout joyfully because of your righteousness.
8 Jehovah is compassionate and merciful, Slow to anger and great in loyal love.
9 Jehovah is good to all, And his mercy is evident in all his works.
10 All your works will glorify you, O Jehovah, And your loyal ones will praise you.
11 They will proclaim the glory of your kingship And speak about your mightiness,
12 To make known to men your mighty acts And the glorious splendor of your kingship.
13 Your kingship is an eternal kingship, And your dominion endures throughout all generations.
14 Jehovah supports all who are falling And raises up all who are bowed down.
15 All eyes look hopefully to you; You give them their food in its season.
16 You open your hand And satisfy the desire of every living thing.
17 Jehovah is righteous in all his ways And loyal in all that he does.
18 Jehovah is near to all those calling on him, To all who call on him in truth.
19 He satisfies the desire of those who fear him; He hears their cry for help, and he rescues them.
20 Jehovah guards all those who love him, But all the wicked he will annihilate.
21 My mouth will declare the praise of Jehovah; Let every living thing praise his holy name forever and ever.
146 Praise Jah! Let my whole being praise Jehovah.
2 I will praise Jehovah all my life. I will sing praises to my God as long as I live.
3 Do not put your trust in princes Nor in a son of man, who cannot bring salvation.
4 His spirit goes out, he returns to the ground; On that very day his thoughts perish.
5 Happy is the one who has the God of Jacob as his helper, Whose hope is in Jehovah his God,
6 The Maker of heaven and earth, Of the sea, and of all that is in them, The One who always remains faithful,
7 The One securing justice for those defrauded, The One giving bread to the hungry. Jehovah is releasing the prisoners.
8 Jehovah is opening the eyes of the blind; Jehovah is raising up those bowed down; Jehovah loves the righteous.
9 Jehovah is protecting the foreign residents; He sustains the fatherless child and the widow, But he thwarts the plans of the wicked.
10 Jehovah will be King forever, Your God, O Zion, for generation after generation. Praise Jah!
147 Praise Jah! It is good to sing praises to our God; How pleasant and fitting it is to praise him!
2 Jehovah is building Jerusalem; He gathers together the dispersed ones of Israel.
3 He heals the brokenhearted; He binds up their wounds.
4 He counts the number of the stars; He calls all of them by name.
5 Our Lord is great and is mighty in power; His understanding is beyond measure.
6 Jehovah raises up the meek, But he hurls the wicked to the ground.
7 Sing to Jehovah with thanksgiving; Sing praises to our God, accompanied by the harp,
8 The One who covers the heavens with clouds, The One providing rain for the earth, The One making grass sprout on the mountains.
9 To the animals he gives food, To the young ravens that call out for it.
10 He does not delight in the power of the horse; Nor is he impressed by the strong legs of a man.
11 Jehovah finds pleasure in those who fear him, In those waiting for his loyal love.
12 Glorify Jehovah, O Jerusalem. Praise your God, O Zion.
13 He makes the bars of your city gates strong; He blesses your sons within you.
14 He brings peace to your territory; He satisfies you with the finest wheat.
15 He sends his command to the earth; His word runs swiftly.
16 He sends the snow like wool; He scatters the frost just like ashes.
17 He hurls down his hailstones like morsels of bread. Who can withstand his cold?
18 He sends out his word, and they melt. He makes his wind blow, and the waters flow.
19 He declares his word to Jacob, His regulations and judgments to Israel.
20 He has not done so with any other nation; They know nothing about his judgments. Praise Jah!
148 Praise Jah! Praise Jehovah from the heavens; Praise him in the heights.
2 Praise him, all his angels. Praise him, all his army.
3 Praise him, sun and moon. Praise him, all shining stars.
4 Praise him, O highest heavens And waters above the heavens.
5 Let them praise the name of Jehovah, For he commanded, and they were created.
6 He keeps them established forever and ever; He has issued a decree that will not pass away.
7 Praise Jehovah from the earth, You great sea creatures and all deep waters,
8 You lightning and hail, snow and thick clouds, You storm wind, carrying out his word,
9 You mountains and all you hills, You fruit trees and all you cedars,
10 You wild animals and all you domestic animals, You creeping things and winged birds,
11 You kings of the earth and all you nations, You princes and all you judges of the earth,
12 You young men and young women, Old men and young together.
13 Let them praise the name of Jehovah, For his name alone is unreachably high. His majesty is above earth and heaven.
14 He will exalt the strength of his people, For the praise of all his loyal ones, Of the sons of Israel, the people close to him. Praise Jah!
149 Praise Jah! Sing to Jehovah a new song; Praise him in the congregation of the loyal ones.
2 Let Israel rejoice in its Grand Maker; Let the sons of Zion be joyful in their King.
3 Let them praise his name with dancing And sing praises to him, accompanied by the tambourine and the harp.
4 For Jehovah takes pleasure in his people. He adorns the meek with salvation.
5 Let the loyal ones exult in glory; Let them shout for joy upon their beds.
6 Let the songs praising God be in their throat, And a two-edged sword be in their hand,
7 To execute vengeance on the nations And punishment on the peoples,
8 To bind their kings with shackles And their nobles with iron fetters,
9 To execute the judgment written against them. This honor belongs to all his loyal ones. Praise Jah!
150 Praise Jah! Praise God in his holy place. Praise him in the expanse of his strength.
2 Praise him for his mighty works. Praise him for his exceeding greatness.
3 Praise him with the sounding of the horn. Praise him with the stringed instrument and the harp.
4 Praise him with the tambourine and the circle dance. Praise him with strings and the flute.
5 Praise him with ringing cymbals. Praise him with crashing cymbals.
6 Every breathing thing—let it praise Jah. Praise Jah!
1 The proverbs of Solʹo·mon, the son of David, the king of Israel:
2 To learn wisdom and discipline; To understand wise sayings;
3 To acquire the discipline that gives insight, Righteousness, good judgment, and uprightness;
4 To impart shrewdness to the inexperienced; To give a young man knowledge and thinking ability.
5 A wise person listens and takes in more instruction; A man of understanding acquires skillful direction
6 To understand a proverb and a puzzling saying, The words of the wise and their riddles.
7 The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of knowledge. Only fools despise wisdom and discipline.
8 Listen, my son, to the discipline of your father, And do not forsake the instruction of your mother.
9 They are an attractive wreath for your head And a fine ornament for your neck.
10 My son, if sinners try to entice you, do not consent.
11 If they say: “Come with us. Let us set an ambush to shed blood. We will lie hidden, waiting for innocent victims without cause.
12 We will swallow them alive as the Grave does, Whole, like those going down to the pit.
13 Let us seize all their precious treasures; We will fill our houses with spoil.
14 You should join us, And we will all share equally what we steal.”
15 My son, do not follow them. Keep your feet off their path,
16 For their feet run to do evil; They hurry to shed blood.
17 It is surely in vain to spread a net in full sight of a bird.
18 That is why these lie in ambush to shed blood; They lie hidden to take the lives of others.
19 These are the ways of those seeking dishonest profit, Which will take away the life of those who obtain it.
20 True wisdom cries aloud in the street. It keeps raising its voice in the public squares.
21 At the corner of the busy streets it calls out. At the entrances of the city gates it says:
22 “How long will you inexperienced ones love inexperience? How long will you ridiculers take pleasure in ridicule? And how long will you foolish ones hate knowledge?
23 Respond to my reproof. Then I will pour out my spirit for you; I will make my words known to you.
24 Because I called out, but you kept refusing, I stretched out my hand, but no one was paying attention,
25 You kept neglecting all my advice And rejecting my reproof,
26 I also will laugh when disaster strikes you; I will mock when what you dread comes,
27 When what you dread comes like a storm, And your disaster arrives like a storm wind, When distress and trouble come upon you.
28 At that time they will keep calling me, but I will not answer; They will eagerly look for me, but they will not find me,
29 Because they hated knowledge, And they did not choose to fear Jehovah.
30 They refused my advice; They disrespected all my reproof.
31 So they will bear the consequences of their way, And they will be glutted with their own counsel.
32 For the waywardness of the inexperienced will kill them, And the complacency of fools will destroy them.
33 But the one listening to me will dwell in security And be undisturbed by the dread of calamity.”
2 My son, if you accept my sayings And treasure up my commandments,
2 By making your ear attentive to wisdom And inclining your heart to discernment;
3 Moreover, if you call out for understanding And raise your voice for discernment;
4 If you keep seeking for it as for silver, And you keep searching for it as for hidden treasures;
5 Then you will understand the fear of Jehovah, And you will find the knowledge of God.
6 For Jehovah himself gives wisdom; From his mouth come knowledge and discernment.
7 He treasures up practical wisdom for the upright; He is a shield for those walking in integrity.
8 He watches over the paths of justice, And he will guard the way of his loyal ones.
9 Then you will understand what is righteous and just and fair, The entire course of what is good.
10 When wisdom enters your heart And knowledge becomes pleasant to your soul,
11 Thinking ability will keep watch over you, And discernment will safeguard you,
12 To save you from the bad course, From the man speaking perverse things,
13 From those leaving the upright paths To walk in the ways of darkness,
14 From those who rejoice in wrongdoing, Who find joy in the perverseness of evil,
15 Those whose paths are crooked And whose entire course is devious.
16 It will save you from the wayward woman, From the smooth words of the immoral woman,
17 Who abandons the close companion of her youth And forgets the covenant of her God;
18 For her house sinks down into death, And her paths lead to those powerless in death.
19 None of those having relations with her will return, Nor will they regain the pathways of life.
20 So follow the way of good people And stay on the paths of the righteous,
21 For only the upright will reside in the earth, And the blameless will remain in it.
22 As for the wicked, they will be cut off from the earth, And the treacherous will be torn away from it.
3 My son, do not forget my teaching, And may your heart observe my commandments,
2 Because they will add many days And years of life and peace to you.
3 Do not let loyal love and faithfulness leave you. Tie them around your neck; Write them on the tablet of your heart;
4 Then you will find favor and good insight In the eyes of God and man.
5 Trust in Jehovah with all your heart, And do not rely on your own understanding.
6 In all your ways take notice of him, And he will make your paths straight.
7 Do not become wise in your own eyes. Fear Jehovah and turn away from bad.
8 It will be a healing to your body And refreshment for your bones.
9 Honor Jehovah with your valuable things, With the firstfruits of all your produce;
10 Then your storehouses will be completely filled, And your vats will overflow with new wine.
11 My son, do not reject the discipline of Jehovah, And do not loathe his reproof,
12 For those whom Jehovah loves he reproves, Just as a father does a son in whom he delights.
13 Happy is the man who finds wisdom And the man who acquires discernment;
14 To gain it is better than gaining silver, And having it as profit is better than having gold.
15 It is more precious than corals; Nothing you desire can compare to it.
16 Long life is in its right hand; Riches and glory are in its left hand.
17 Its ways are pleasant, And all its paths are peaceful.
18 It is a tree of life to those who take hold of it, And those who keep firm hold of it will be called happy.
19 Jehovah founded the earth in wisdom. He solidly established the heavens in discernment.
20 By his knowledge the watery deeps were split apart And the cloudy skies dripped with dew.
21 My son, do not lose sight of them. Safeguard practical wisdom and thinking ability;
22 They will give you life And be an adornment for your neck;
23 Then you will walk on your way in safety, And your foot will never stumble.
24 When you lie down, you will have no fear; You will lie down, and your sleep will be pleasant.
25 You will not fear any sudden terror Nor the storm that is coming on the wicked.
26 For Jehovah will prove to be your source of confidence; He will keep your foot from being caught.
27 Do not withhold good from those to whom you should give it If it is within your power to help.
28 Do not say to your neighbor, “Go away; come back later! I will give it to you tomorrow,” If you can give it now.
29 Do not plot harm against your neighbor When he lives in a sense of security with you.
30 Do not quarrel with a man for no reason If he has done nothing bad to you.
31 Do not envy the violent man Nor choose any of his ways,
32 For Jehovah detests a devious person, But His close friendship is with the upright.
33 The curse of Jehovah is on the house of the wicked one, But he blesses the home of the righteous.
34 For he mocks those who ridicule, But he shows favor to the meek.
35 The wise will inherit honor, But the stupid ones glorify dishonor.
4 Listen, my sons, to the discipline of a father; Pay attention in order to gain understanding,
2 For I will give you good instruction; Do not forsake my teaching.
3 I was a true son to my father And the one especially loved by my mother.
4 He taught me and said: “May your heart hold fast to my words. Keep my commandments and continue living.
5 Acquire wisdom, acquire understanding. Do not forget, and do not turn aside from what I say.
6 Do not forsake it, and it will protect you. Love it, and it will safeguard you.
7 Wisdom is the most important thing, so acquire wisdom, And with all you acquire, acquire understanding.
8 Highly esteem it, and it will exalt you. It will honor you because you embrace it.
9 It will place an attractive wreath on your head; It will adorn you with a crown of beauty.”
10 Listen, my son, and accept my sayings, And the years of your life will be many.
11 I will instruct you in the way of wisdom; I will lead you in the tracks of uprightness.
12 When you walk, your steps will not be hindered; And if you run, you will not stumble.
13 Hold on to discipline; do not let it go. Safeguard it, for it means your life.
14 Do not enter the path of the wicked, And do not walk in the way of evil men.
15 Shun it, do not take it; Turn away from it, and pass it by.
16 For they cannot sleep unless they do what is bad. They are robbed of sleep unless they cause someone’s downfall.
17 They feed themselves with the bread of wickedness, And they drink the wine of violence.
18 But the path of the righteous is like the bright morning light That grows brighter and brighter until full daylight.
19 The way of the wicked is like the darkness; They do not know what makes them stumble.
20 My son, pay attention to my words; Listen carefully to my sayings.
21 Do not lose sight of them; Keep them deep within your heart,
22 For they are life to those who find them And health to their whole body.
23 Above all the things that you guard, safeguard your heart, For out of it are the sources of life.
24 Put crooked speech away from you, And keep devious talk far away from you.
25 Your eyes should look straight ahead, Yes, fix your gaze straight ahead of you.
26 Smooth out the course of your feet, And all your ways will be sure.
27 Do not incline to the right or the left. Turn your feet away from what is bad.
5 My son, pay attention to my wisdom. Listen carefully to my discernment,
2 So that you may guard your thinking abilities And safeguard knowledge with your lips.
3 For the lips of a wayward woman drip like a honeycomb, And her mouth is smoother than oil.
4 But in the end she is as bitter as wormwood And as sharp as a two-edged sword.
5 Her feet descend into death. Her steps lead straight to the Grave.
6 She gives no thought to the path of life. Her course wanders, but she does not know where.
7 Now, my sons, listen to me And do not turn away from what I am saying.
8 Stay far away from her; Do not go near the entrance of her house,
9 So that you may not give your dignity to others Nor reap years of what is cruel;
10 So that strangers may not drain your resources And what you labored for go to the house of a foreigner.
11 Otherwise, you will groan at the end of your life When your flesh and body waste away
12 And you say: “How I hated discipline! How my heart despised reproof!
13 I did not listen to the voice of my instructors Or pay attention to my teachers.
14 I have come to the brink of complete ruin In the midst of the entire congregation.”
15 Drink water from your own cistern And flowing water from your own well.
16 Should your springs be dispersed outside, Your streams of water in the public squares?
17 Let them be for you alone, And not for strangers with you.
18 May your own fountain be blessed, And may you rejoice with the wife of your youth,
19 A loving doe, a graceful mountain goat. Let her breasts satisfy you at all times. May you be captivated by her love constantly.
20 So why, my son, should you be captivated by a wayward woman Or embrace the bosom of an immoral woman?
21 For the ways of man are before the eyes of Jehovah; He examines all his paths.
22 The wicked one is ensnared by his own errors, And he will be caught in the ropes of his own sin.
23 He will die for lack of discipline And go astray because of his excessive foolishness.
6 My son, if you have put up security for your neighbor, If you have given your handshake to a stranger,
2 If you have been ensnared by your promise, Caught by the words of your mouth,
3 Do this, my son, and free yourself, For you have fallen into the hand of your neighbor: Go and humble yourself and urgently plead with your neighbor.
4 Do not allow your eyes to sleep, Nor your eyelids to slumber.
5 Free yourself like a gazelle from the hunter’s hand, Like a bird from the hand of the birdcatcher.
6 Go to the ant, you lazy one; Observe its ways and become wise.
7 Although it has no commander, officer, or ruler,
8 It prepares its food in the summer, And it gathers its food supplies in the harvest.
9 How long, you lazy one, will you lie there? When will you rise up from your sleep?
10 A little sleep, a little slumbering, A little folding of the hands to rest,
11 And your poverty will come like a bandit, And your want like an armed man.
12 A useless and wicked man walks about with crooked speech;
13 He winks with his eye, signals with his foot, and motions with his fingers.
14 With a perverted heart, He is always scheming evil and spreading contentions.
15 Therefore, his disaster will come suddenly; In a moment he will be broken beyond healing.
16 There are six things that Jehovah hates; Yes, seven things that he detests:
17 Haughty eyes, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood,
18 A heart plotting wicked schemes, and feet that run quickly to evil,
19 A false witness who lies with every breath, And anyone sowing contentions among brothers.
20 Observe, my son, the commandment of your father, And do not forsake the instruction of your mother.
21 Always bind them around your heart; Tie them about your neck.
22 When you walk about, it will lead you; When you lie down, it will stand guard over you; And when you awaken, it will speak to you.
23 For the commandment is a lamp, And the law is a light, And the reproofs of discipline are the way to life.
24 They will guard you against the bad woman, Against the seductive tongue of the immoral woman.
25 Do not desire her beauty in your heart Or allow her to captivate you with her alluring eyes,
26 For because of a prostitute, a man is reduced to a loaf of bread, But the wife of another man preys on a precious life.
27 Can a man rake fire to his chest and not burn his garments?
28 Or can a man walk on hot coals without scorching his feet?
29 It is the same with anyone having relations with his neighbor’s wife; No one who touches her will go unpunished.
30 People do not despise a thief If he steals to satisfy himself when he is hungry.
31 Yet, when found, he will repay sevenfold; He will give up all the valuables of his house.
32 Anyone committing adultery with a woman is lacking good sense; The one who does so brings ruin on himself.
33 He will get only wounds and dishonor, And his disgrace will not be wiped away.
34 For jealousy makes a husband furious; He will show no compassion when he takes revenge.
35 He will accept no compensation; He will not be appeased, no matter how large you make the gift.
7 My son, keep my sayings, And treasure up my commandments.
2 Keep my commandments and live; Guard my instruction like the pupil of your eye.
3 Tie them around your fingers; Write them on the tablet of your heart.
4 Say to wisdom, “You are my sister,” And call understanding “my relative,”
5 To guard you against the wayward woman, Against the immoral woman and her smooth words.
6 From the window of my house, Through my lattice, I looked down,
7 And as I observed the naive ones, I discerned among the youths a young man lacking good sense.
8 He passed along the street near her corner, And he marched in the direction of her house
9 In the twilight, in the evening, At the approach of night and darkness.
10 Then I saw a woman meet him, Dressed like a prostitute, with a cunning heart.
11 She is loud and defiant. She never stays at home.
12 One moment she is outside, next she is in the public squares, She lurks near every corner.
13 She grabs hold of him and gives him a kiss; With a bold face, she says to him:
14 “I had to offer communion sacrifices. Today I paid my vows.
15 That is why I came out to meet you, To look for you, and I found you!
16 I have spread fine covers upon my bed, Colorful linen from Egypt.
17 I have sprinkled my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.
18 Come, let us drink our fill of love until the morning; Let us enjoy passionate love together,
19 For my husband is not at home; He has gone on a distant journey.
20 He took a bag of money with him, And he will not return until the day of the full moon.”
21 She misleads him with great persuasiveness. She seduces him with smooth speech.
22 Suddenly he goes after her, like a bull to the slaughter, Like a fool to be punished in the stocks,
23 Until an arrow pierces his liver; Like a bird rushing into a trap, he does not know that it will cost him his life.
24 And now, my sons, listen to me; Pay attention to the words I speak.
25 Do not let your heart turn aside to her ways. Do not stray onto her paths,
26 For she has caused many to fall down slain, And those she has killed are numerous.
27 Her house leads to the Grave; It goes down to the inner chambers of death.
8 Is not wisdom calling out? Is not discernment raising its voice?
2 On the heights along the road, It takes its position at the crossroads.
3 Next to the gates leading into the city, At the entrances of the doorways, It keeps crying out loudly:
4 “To you, O people, I am calling; I raise my voice to everyone.
5 You inexperienced ones, learn shrewdness; You stupid ones, acquire an understanding heart.
6 Listen, for what I say is important, My lips speak what is right;
7 For my mouth softly utters truth, And my lips detest what is wicked.
8 All the sayings of my mouth are righteous. None of them are twisted or crooked.
9 They are all straightforward to the discerning And right to those who have found knowledge.
10 Take my discipline instead of silver, And knowledge rather than the finest gold,
11 For wisdom is better than corals; All other desirable things cannot compare to it.
12 I, wisdom, dwell together with shrewdness; I have found knowledge and thinking ability.
13 The fear of Jehovah means the hating of bad. I hate self-exaltation and pride and the evil way and perverse speech.
14 I possess good advice and practical wisdom; Understanding and power are mine.
15 By me kings keep reigning, And high officials decree righteousness.
16 By me princes keep ruling, And nobles judge in righteousness.
17 I love those loving me, And those seeking me will find me.
18 Riches and glory are with me, Lasting wealth and righteousness.
19 My fruitage is better than gold, even refined gold, And what I produce is better than the finest silver.
20 I walk in the path of righteousness, In the middle of the pathways of justice;
21 I give a rich inheritance to those who love me, And I fill up their storehouses.
22 Jehovah produced me as the beginning of his way, The earliest of his achievements of long ago.
23 From ancient times I was installed, From the start, from times earlier than the earth.
24 When there were no deep waters, I was brought forth, When there were no springs overflowing with water.
25 Before the mountains were set in place, Before the hills, I was brought forth,
26 When he had not yet made the earth and its fields Or the first clods of earth’s soil.
27 When he prepared the heavens, I was there; When he marked out the horizon on the surface of the waters,
28 When he established the clouds above, When he founded the fountains of the deep,
29 When he set a decree for the sea That its waters should not pass beyond his order, When he established the foundations of the earth,
30 Then I was beside him as a master worker. I was the one he was especially fond of day by day; I rejoiced before him all the time;
31 I rejoiced over his habitable earth, And I was especially fond of the sons of men.
32 And now, my sons, listen to me; Yes, happy are those who keep my ways.
33 Listen to discipline and become wise, And never neglect it.
34 Happy is the man who listens to me By coming early to my doors day by day, By waiting next to my doorposts;
35 For the one finding me will find life, And he receives approval from Jehovah.
36 But the one who ignores me harms himself, And those who hate me love death.”
9 True wisdom has built its house; It has carved out its seven pillars.
2 It has fully prepared its meat; It has mixed its wine; It has also arranged its table.
3 It has sent out its female servants To call out from the heights above the city:
4 “Whoever is inexperienced, let him come in here.” She says to the one lacking good sense:
5 “Come, eat my bread And share in drinking the wine that I have mixed.
6 Leave behind your inexperience and live; Walk forward in the way of understanding.”
7 The one who corrects a ridiculer invites dishonor, And whoever reproves someone wicked will get hurt.
8 Do not reprove a ridiculer, or he will hate you. Reprove a wise person, and he will love you.
9 Share with a wise person, and he will become wiser. Teach someone righteous, and he will add to his learning.
10 The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom, And knowledge of the Most Holy One is understanding.
11 For by me your days will be many, And years will be added to your life.
12 If you become wise, you are wise to your own advantage, But if you are a ridiculer, you alone will bear it.
13 A stupid woman is loud. She is ignorant and knows absolutely nothing.
14 She sits at the entrance of her house On a seat in the high places of the city,
15 Calling out to those passing by, To those walking straight ahead on their way:
16 “Whoever is inexperienced, let him come in here.” She says to those lacking good sense:
17 “Stolen waters are sweet, And food eaten in secret is pleasant.”
18 But he does not know that those powerless in death are there, That her guests are in the depths of the Grave.
10 Proverbs of Solʹo·mon. A wise son makes his father rejoice, But a foolish son is the grief of his mother.
2 The treasures gained by wickedness will be of no benefit, But righteousness is what rescues from death.
3 Jehovah will not cause the righteous one to go hungry, But he will deny the wicked what they crave.
4 Idle hands will cause poverty, But diligent hands bring riches.
5 The son acting with insight gathers the crop in summer, But the son acting shamefully is fast asleep during the harvest.
6 Blessings are on the head of the righteous one, But the mouth of the wicked conceals violence.
7 The memory of the righteous one is due for a blessing, But the name of the wicked will rot.
8 The wisehearted person will accept instructions, But the one speaking foolishly will be trodden down.
9 The one walking in integrity will walk in security, But the one making his ways crooked will be found out.
10 The one who slyly winks his eye causes grief, And the one who speaks foolishly will be trodden down.
11 The mouth of the righteous one is a source of life, But the mouth of the wicked conceals violence.
12 Hatred is what stirs up contentions, But love covers over all transgressions.
13 Wisdom is found on the lips of the discerning person, But the rod is for the back of one lacking good sense.
14 Those who are wise treasure up knowledge, But the mouth of the fool invites ruin.
15 The wealth of a rich man is his fortified city. The ruin of the poor is their poverty.
16 The activity of the righteous one leads to life; But the produce of the wicked one leads to sin.
17 The one who heeds discipline is a path to life, But the one who ignores reproof leads others astray.
18 The one who conceals his hatred speaks lies, And the one spreading malicious reports is stupid.
19 When words are many, transgression cannot be avoided, But whoever controls his lips acts discreetly.
20 The tongue of the righteous one is like the finest silver, But the heart of the wicked one is worth little.
21 The lips of the righteous one nourish many, But the foolish die for lack of sense.
22 It is the blessing of Jehovah that makes one rich, And He adds no pain with it.
23 Engaging in shameful conduct is like a game to the stupid one, But wisdom is for the man of discernment.
24 What the wicked one fears will come upon him; But the desire of the righteous will be granted.
25 When the storm passes by, the wicked one will be no more, But the righteous one is a foundation forever.
26 Like vinegar to the teeth and smoke to the eyes, So the lazy person is to the one who sends him.
27 The fear of Jehovah prolongs life, But the years of the wicked will be cut short.
28 The expectation of the righteous brings joy, But the hope of the wicked will perish.
29 The way of Jehovah is a stronghold for the blameless one, But it means ruin for evildoers.
30 The righteous one will never be made to fall, But the wicked will no longer inhabit the earth.
31 The mouth of the righteous one produces wisdom, But the perverse tongue will be cut off.
32 The lips of the righteous one know what is pleasing, But the mouth of the wicked is perverse.
11 Dishonest scales are detestable to Jehovah, But an accurate weight brings pleasure to him.
2 When presumptuousness comes, dishonor will follow, But wisdom is with the modest ones.
3 The integrity of the upright is what guides them, But the deviousness of the treacherous will destroy them.
4 Wealth will be of no benefit on the day of fury, But righteousness is what will rescue from death.
5 The righteousness of the blameless one makes his path straight, But the wicked one will fall because of his own wickedness.
6 The righteousness of the upright will rescue them, But the treacherous will be caught by their own desires.
7 When a wicked man dies, his hope perishes; And expectations based on his power also perish.
8 The righteous one is rescued from distress, And the wicked one takes his place.
9 By his mouth the apostate brings his neighbor to ruin, But by knowledge the righteous are rescued.
10 The goodness of the righteous makes a city rejoice, And when the wicked perish, there is a joyful cry.
11 Because of the blessing of the upright a city is exalted, But the mouth of the wicked tears it down.
12 Whoever is lacking good sense shows contempt for his neighbor, But the man of true discernment remains silent.
13 A slanderer goes about revealing confidential talk, But the trustworthy person keeps a confidence.
14 When there is no skillful direction, the people fall, But there is success through many advisers.
15 Whoever guarantees a loan for a stranger is sure to fare badly, But whoever avoids shaking hands in a pledge will be secure.
16 A gracious woman acquires glory, But ruthless men seize riches.
17 A kind man benefits himself, But the cruel person brings trouble on himself.
18 The wicked one earns deceptive wages, But the one who sows righteousness receives a true reward.
19 The one standing firmly for righteousness is in line for life, But the one chasing after evil is in line for death.
20 Those crooked at heart are detestable to Jehovah, But those whose way is blameless bring pleasure to him.
21 Be assured of this: An evil person will not go unpunished, But the children of the righteous will escape.
22 Like a gold ring in the snout of a pig Is a beautiful woman who rejects good sense.
23 The desire of the righteous leads to good, But what the wicked hope for leads to fury.
24 One gives generously and ends up with more; Another withholds what should be given, but he comes to poverty.
25 The generous person will prosper, And whoever refreshes others will himself be refreshed.
26 The people will curse the one who withholds grain, But they will bless the one who sells it.
27 The one who diligently seeks to do good seeks favor, But the one searching for bad—that is what will surely come upon him.
28 The one trusting in his riches will fall, But the righteous will flourish like the foliage.
29 Anyone who brings trouble on his household will inherit the wind, And the fool will be a servant to the wisehearted one.
30 The fruitage of the righteous one is a tree of life, And the one who wins souls is wise.
31 If, indeed, the righteous one on earth is rewarded, How much more the wicked one and the sinner!
12 The one who loves discipline loves knowledge, But the one who hates reproof is unreasoning.
2 The good person obtains Jehovah’s approval, But He condemns the man of wicked schemes.
3 No man is made secure by wickedness, But the righteous will never be uprooted.
4 A capable wife is a crown to her husband, But the wife who acts shamefully is like rottenness in his bones.
5 The thoughts of the righteous are just, But the guidance of the wicked is deceptive.
6 The words of the wicked are a deadly ambush, But the mouth of the upright saves them.
7 When the wicked are overthrown, they are no more, But the house of the righteous will keep standing.
8 A man is praised for the discretion of his mouth, But one with a twisted heart will be treated with contempt.
9 Better to be lightly esteemed and have a servant Than to glorify oneself and have no food.
10 The righteous one takes care of his domestic animals, But even the mercy of the wicked is cruel.
11 The one who cultivates his land will be satisfied with food, But the one pursuing worthless things is lacking good sense.
12 The wicked man envies what other evil men have caught, But the root of the righteous bears fruit.
13 The evil man is ensnared by his own sinful speech, But the righteous one escapes from distress.
14 From the fruitage of his speech a man is satisfied with good, And the work of his hands will reward him.
15 The way of the fool is right in his own eyes, But the wise one accepts advice.
16 A fool immediately shows his annoyance, But the shrewd man overlooks an insult.
17 The one who testifies faithfully will tell the truth, But a false witness speaks deceit.
18 Thoughtless speech is like the stabs of a sword, But the tongue of the wise is a healing.
19 Truthful lips will endure forever, But a lying tongue will last for only a moment.
20 Deceit is in the heart of those who plot mischief, But those who promote peace have joy.
21 No harm will befall the righteous one, But the wicked will have their fill of calamity.
22 Lying lips are detestable to Jehovah, But those acting faithfully bring pleasure to him.
23 A shrewd man conceals what he knows, But the heart of the fool blurts out his foolishness.
24 The hand of the diligent ones will rule, But idle hands will be put to forced labor.
25 Anxiety in a man’s heart weighs it down, But a good word cheers it up.
26 The righteous one searches out his pastures, But the course of the wicked leads them astray.
27 The lazy do not chase after the prey, But diligence is a man’s precious treasure.
28 The path of righteousness leads to life; Along its pathway there is no death.
13 A wise son accepts his father’s discipline, But the scoffer does not listen to a rebuke.
2 From the fruitage of his speech a man will eat what is good, But the very desire of the treacherous is for violence.
3 The one guarding his mouth protects his life, But the one opening his lips wide will come to ruin.
4 The lazy person has his cravings, yet he has nothing, But the diligent one will be fully satisfied.
5 The righteous one hates lies, But the actions of the wicked bring shame and disgrace.
6 Righteousness protects the one whose way is innocent, But wickedness brings down the sinner.
7 There is one who pretends to be rich, yet has nothing; There is another who pretends to be poor, yet has great wealth.
8 Riches are the ransom for a man’s life, But the poor are not even threatened.
9 The light of the righteous shines brightly, But the lamp of the wicked will be extinguished.
10 Presumptuousness leads only to strife, But wisdom belongs to those who seek advice.
11 Wealth quickly gained will dwindle, But the wealth of the one who gathers it little by little will increase.
12 Expectation postponed makes the heart sick, But a desire realized is a tree of life.
13 Whoever despises instruction will pay the penalty, But the one who respects the commandment will be rewarded.
14 The teaching of the wise one is a source of life To turn one away from the snares of death.
15 Keen insight wins favor, But the way of the treacherous is harsh.
16 The shrewd person acts with knowledge, But the fool exposes his own foolishness.
17 A wicked messenger falls into trouble, But a faithful envoy brings healing.
18 Whoever neglects discipline comes to poverty and disgrace, But the one accepting correction will be glorified.
19 Desire when realized is sweet to a person, But the stupid hate to turn away from bad.
20 The one walking with the wise will become wise, But the one who has dealings with the stupid will fare badly.
21 Calamity pursues sinners, But prosperity rewards the righteous.
22 The good person leaves an inheritance to his grandchildren, But the sinner’s wealth will be stored up for the righteous one.
23 The plowed field of the poor yields much food, But it may be swept away by injustice.
24 Whoever holds back his rod hates his son, But the one who loves him disciplines him diligently.
25 The righteous one eats and satisfies his appetite, But the stomach of the wicked is empty.
14 The truly wise woman builds up her house, But the foolish one tears it down with her own hands.
2 The one walking in his uprightness fears Jehovah, But the one whose ways are devious despises Him.
3 The rod of haughtiness is in the mouth of the fool, But the lips of the wise will protect them.
4 Where there are no cattle the manger is clean, But the power of a bull yields an abundant harvest.
5 A faithful witness will not lie, But a false witness lies with every breath.
6 The scoffer seeks wisdom and finds none, But knowledge comes easily to the person with understanding.
7 Stay away from the foolish man, For you will not find knowledge on his lips.
8 By wisdom the shrewd man understands the way he is going, But the stupid are deceived by their foolishness.
9 Fools make fun of guilt, But among the upright, there is a willingness to reconcile.
10 The heart knows its own bitterness, And no outsider can share in its joy.
11 The house of the wicked will be destroyed, But the tent of the upright will flourish.
12 There is a way that seems right to a man, But in the end it leads to death.
13 Even in laughter the heart may feel pain, And rejoicing may end in grief.
14 The one wayward at heart will reap the results of his ways, But the good man reaps the reward of his dealings.
15 The naive person believes every word, But the shrewd one ponders each step.
16 The wise one is cautious and turns away from evil, But the stupid one is reckless and overconfident.
17 The one who is quick to anger acts foolishly, But the man who thinks things out is hated.
18 The naive will inherit foolishness, But the shrewd are crowned with knowledge.
19 Bad people will have to bow down before the good, And the wicked will bow at the gates of the righteous.
20 The poor man is hated even by his neighbors, But many are the friends of the rich person.
21 The one who despises his neighbor sins, But whoever shows compassion to the lowly is happy.
22 Will not those who plot mischief go astray? But those intent on doing good will receive loyal love and faithfulness.
23 There is benefit in every kind of hard work, But mere talk leads to want.
24 The crown of the wise is their wealth; But the foolishness of the stupid is only foolishness.
25 A true witness saves lives, But a deceitful one lies with every breath.
26 There is strong confidence in the fear of Jehovah, And it will be a refuge for his children.
27 The fear of Jehovah is a fountain of life, To turn one away from the snares of death.
28 A multitude of people are a king’s majesty, But a ruler without subjects is ruined.
29 The one who is slow to anger has great discernment, But the impatient one displays his foolishness.
30 A calm heart gives life to the body, But jealousy is rottenness to the bones.
31 The one who defrauds the lowly one insults his Maker, But whoever shows compassion to the poor glorifies Him.
32 The wicked one will be brought down by his own evil, But the righteous one will find refuge in his integrity.
33 Wisdom rests quietly in the heart of an understanding person, But among the stupid it must make itself known.
34 Righteousness exalts a nation, But sin is disgraceful to a people.
35 The king finds pleasure in a servant who acts with insight, But his fury is against the one who acts shamefully.
15 A mild answer turns away rage, But a harsh word stirs up anger.
2 The tongue of the wise makes good use of knowledge, But the mouth of the stupid blurts out foolishness.
3 The eyes of Jehovah are everywhere, Watching both the bad and the good.
4 A calm tongue is a tree of life, But twisted speech causes despair.
5 A fool disrespects his father’s discipline, But a shrewd person accepts correction.
6 In the house of the righteous one there is abundant treasure, But the produce of the wicked one brings him trouble.
7 The lips of the wise spread knowledge, But not so the heart of the stupid one.
8 The sacrifice of the wicked is detestable to Jehovah, But the prayer of the upright is a pleasure to Him.
9 Jehovah detests the way of the wicked one, But he loves the one who pursues righteousness.
10 Discipline seems bad to one forsaking the way, But whoever hates reproof will die.
11 The Grave and the place of destruction are in full view of Jehovah. How much more so the hearts of men!
12 The scoffer does not love the one correcting him. He will not consult the wise.
13 A joyful heart makes for a cheerful countenance, But heartache crushes the spirit.
14 The understanding heart seeks knowledge, But the mouth of the stupid feeds on foolishness.
15 All the days of the afflicted one are bad, But the one with a cheerful heart has a continual feast.
16 Better is a little in the fear of Jehovah Than great wealth along with anxiety.
17 Better is a dish of vegetables where there is love Than a fattened bull where there is hatred.
18 A hot-tempered man stirs up strife, But one who is slow to anger calms a quarrel.
19 The way of the lazy one is like a hedge of thorns, But the path of the upright is like a level highway.
20 A wise son makes his father rejoice, But a stupid man despises his mother.
21 Foolishness is a joy to one lacking good sense, But the man of discernment walks straight ahead.
22 Plans fail when there is no consultation, But there is accomplishment through many advisers.
23 A man rejoices in giving the right answer, And a word spoken at the right time—how good it is!
24 The path of life leads upward to one with insight, To turn him away from the Grave below.
25 Jehovah will tear down the house of the haughty, But he will preserve the boundary of the widow.
26 Jehovah detests the schemes of the wicked one, But pleasant sayings are pure to Him.
27 The one making dishonest profit brings trouble on his own household, But the one hating bribes will keep living.
28 The heart of the righteous one meditates before answering, But the mouth of the wicked blurts out bad things.
29 Jehovah is far away from the wicked, But he hears the prayer of the righteous.
30 Bright eyes make the heart rejoice; A good report invigorates the bones.
31 The one who listens to life-giving reproof Is at home among the wise.
32 Anyone refusing discipline despises his life, But whoever listens to reproof acquires understanding.
33 The fear of Jehovah is a training in wisdom, And before glory there is humility.
16 A man prepares the thoughts of his heart, But the answer he gives is from Jehovah.
2 All of a man’s ways seem right to him, But Jehovah examines the motives.
3 Commit to Jehovah whatever you do, And your plans will succeed.
4 Jehovah has made everything work for his purpose, Even the wicked for the day of disaster.
5 Everyone proud in heart is detestable to Jehovah. Be assured that he will not go unpunished.
6 By loyal love and faithfulness, error is atoned for, And by fearing Jehovah one turns away from bad.
7 When Jehovah is pleased with a man’s ways, He causes even his enemies to be at peace with him.
8 Better is a little with righteousness Than a large income without justice.
9 A man may plot out his course in his heart, But it is Jehovah who directs his steps.
10 Inspired decision should be on the lips of a king; He must never betray justice.
11 Honest balances and scales are from Jehovah; All the weights in the bag are his doing.
12 Wicked practices are detestable to kings, For the throne is firmly established by righteousness.
13 Righteous speech is a pleasure to kings. They love someone who speaks honestly.
14 The king’s rage is like a messenger of death, But the wise man appeases it.
15 In the light of the king’s face there is life; His favor is like a cloud of rain in spring.
16 How much better to acquire wisdom than gold! To gain understanding is to be chosen over silver.
17 The highway of the upright avoids what is bad. Whoever safeguards his way preserves his life.
18 Pride is before a crash, And a haughty spirit before stumbling.
19 Better to be humble among the meek Than to share the spoil of the haughty.
20 The one who shows insight in a matter will find success, And happy is the one trusting in Jehovah.
21 The wise in heart will be called understanding, And the one kind in speech adds persuasiveness.
22 Insight is a fountain of life to those possessing it, But fools are disciplined by their own foolishness.
23 The heart of the wise one gives his mouth insight And adds persuasiveness to his speech.
24 Pleasant sayings are a honeycomb, Sweet to the soul and a healing to the bones.
25 There is a way that seems right to a man, But in the end it leads to death.
26 The appetite of a laborer makes him work hard For his hunger urges him on.
27 A worthless man digs up what is bad; His speech is like a scorching fire.
28 A troublemaker causes dissension, And a slanderer separates close friends.
29 A violent man entices his neighbor And leads him in the wrong way.
30 He winks his eye as he schemes harm. He pinches his lips together as he carries out mischief.
31 Gray hair is a crown of beauty When it is found in the way of righteousness.
32 The one slow to anger is better than a mighty man, And the one controlling his temper than one conquering a city.
33 The lot is cast into the lap, But every decision by it is from Jehovah.
17 Better is a piece of dry bread where there is peace Than a house full of feasting along with quarreling.
2 A servant with insight will rule over a son who acts shamefully; He will share in the inheritance as one of the brothers.
3 The refining pot is for silver and the furnace for gold, But Jehovah is the examiner of hearts.
4 A wicked man pays attention to hurtful speech, And a deceptive man listens to a malicious tongue.
5 Whoever mocks the poor insults his Maker, And whoever rejoices over another’s disaster will not go unpunished.
6 Grandsons are a crown to the aged, And fathers are the glory of their sons.
7 Upright speech does not befit a fool. How much less does false speech befit a ruler!
8 A gift is like a precious stone to its owner; Everywhere he turns, it brings him success.
9 Whoever forgives a transgression seeks love, But the one who keeps harping on a matter separates close friends.
10 A rebuke makes a deeper impression on one having understanding Than striking a stupid person a hundred times.
11 A bad man seeks only rebellion, But a cruel messenger will be sent to punish him.
12 Better to meet a bear bereaved of her cubs Than to encounter someone stupid in his foolishness.
13 If anyone repays bad for good, Bad will not depart from his house.
14 Beginning a fight is like opening a floodgate; Before the quarrel breaks out, take your leave.
15 Anyone who acquits the wicked one and anyone who condemns the righteous one —Both of them are detestable to Jehovah.
16 What good is it that the stupid one has the means to acquire wisdom When he has no heart for acquiring it?
17 A true friend shows love at all times And is a brother who is born for times of distress.
18 A man lacking good sense shakes hands and agrees To put up security in the presence of his neighbor.
19 The one who loves conflict loves transgression. Anyone who makes his entryway high invites a crash.
20 The one who is crooked at heart will not find success, And the one who speaks deceitfully will fall into ruin.
21 The one who fathers a stupid child will experience grief; And the father of a senseless child has no joy.
22 A joyful heart is good medicine, But a crushed spirit saps one’s strength.
23 A wicked man will take a bribe in secret To pervert the course of justice.
24 Wisdom is directly in front of the discerning person, But the eyes of the stupid wander to the ends of the earth.
25 A stupid son brings grief to his father And heartache to the one who gave birth to him.
26 To punish the righteous one is not good, And to flog honorable people goes against what is right.
27 A man of knowledge restrains his words, And a discerning man will remain calm.
28 Even a fool who keeps silent will be considered wise, And the one who seals his lips, discerning.
18 Whoever isolates himself pursues his own selfish desires; He rejects all practical wisdom.
2 A stupid person takes no pleasure in understanding; He would rather disclose what is in his heart.
3 When a wicked person comes, contempt also comes, And along with dishonor there is disgrace.
4 The words of a man’s mouth are deep waters. The fountain of wisdom is a bubbling brook.
5 It is not good to show partiality to the wicked one Or to deprive the righteous one of justice.
6 The speech of the stupid one leads to quarrels, And his mouth invites a beating.
7 The mouth of the stupid is his ruin, And his lips are a snare for his life.
8 The words of a slanderer are like tasty morsels; They are gulped right down into the stomach.
9 Whoever is lazy in his work Is a brother to the one who causes ruin.
10 The name of Jehovah is a strong tower. Into it the righteous one runs and receives protection.
11 The wealth of the rich is his fortified city; It is like a protective wall in his imagination.
12 Before a crash a man’s heart is lofty, And before glory there is humility.
13 When anyone replies to a matter before he hears the facts, It is foolish and humiliating.
14 A person’s spirit can sustain him through illness, But who can bear a crushed spirit?
15 The heart of the understanding one acquires knowledge, And the ear of the wise seeks to find knowledge.
16 A man’s gift opens the way for him; It gives him access to great people.
17 The first to state his case seems right, Until the other party comes and cross-examines him.
18 Casting lots puts an end to disputes And decides between strong opponents.
19 A brother offended is more unyielding than a fortified city, And there are disputes like the bars of a fortress.
20 From the fruitage of a man’s speech his stomach will be filled; He will be satisfied with what his lips produce.
21 Death and life are in the power of the tongue; Those who love to use it will eat its fruitage.
22 The one who finds a good wife has found something good, And he receives Jehovah’s favor.
23 The poor man implores when speaking, But the rich man answers harshly.
24 There are companions ready to crush one another, But there is a friend who sticks closer than a brother.
19 It is better to be poor and walk in integrity Than to be stupid and speak lies.
2 A person without knowledge is not good, And the one who acts rashly is sinning.
3 It is a man’s own foolishness that distorts his way, And his heart becomes enraged against Jehovah.
4 Wealth attracts many friends, But the poor man will be deserted even by his friend.
5 A false witness will not go unpunished, And the one who lies with every breath will not escape.
6 Many seek the favor of a noble, And everyone is a friend to the man who gives gifts.
7 All the brothers of a poor man hate him; How much more he is shunned by his friends! He pursues them with requests, but no one responds.
8 Whoever acquires good sense loves himself. Whoever treasures discernment will find success.
9 A false witness will not go unpunished, And the one who lies with every breath will perish.
10 It is not fitting for a fool to live in luxury; How much less for a servant to rule over princes!
11 The insight of a man certainly slows down his anger, And it is beauty on his part to overlook an offense.
12 The king’s rage is like the growling of a lion, But his favor is like dew on the vegetation.
13 A stupid son brings adversity on his father, And a quarrelsome wife is like a roof that never stops leaking.
14 A house and wealth are inherited from fathers, But a discreet wife is from Jehovah.
15 Laziness brings on a deep sleep, And a sluggish person will go hungry.
16 The one who keeps the commandment keeps his life; The one who is reckless about his ways will die.
17 The one showing favor to the lowly is lending to Jehovah, And He will repay him for what he does.
18 Discipline your son while there is hope, And do not become responsible for his death.
19 The hot-tempered man will pay the penalty; If you try to spare him, you will have to do it again and again.
20 Listen to counsel and accept discipline, In order to become wise in your future.
21 Many are the plans in a man’s heart, But the counsel of Jehovah is what will prevail.
22 The desirable thing in a man is his loyal love; And it is better to be poor than to be a liar.
23 The fear of Jehovah leads to life; The one who has it will have a pleasant rest, free from harm.
24 The lazy one buries his hand in the banquet bowl, But he does not even bother to bring it back to his mouth.
25 Strike the ridiculer, so that the inexperienced one may become shrewd, And reprove the understanding one, so that he will increase in knowledge.
26 The one who mistreats his father and drives away his mother Is a son causing shame and disgrace.
27 My son, if you stop listening to discipline, You will stray from the sayings of knowledge.
28 A worthless witness mocks justice, And the mouth of the wicked gulps down evil.
29 Judgment is in store for ridiculers, And beatings for the back of the stupid ones.
20 Wine is a ridiculer, alcohol is unruly; Whoever goes astray by them is not wise.
2 The terror of a king is like the growling of a lion; Whoever provokes his anger risks his own life.
3 It is honorable for a man to refrain from a dispute, But every fool will become embroiled in it.
4 The lazy one does not plow in winter, So he will be begging during the harvest when he has nothing.
5 The thoughts of a man’s heart are like deep waters, But the discerning man draws them out.
6 Many men proclaim their loyal love, But who can find a faithful man?
7 The righteous one is walking in his integrity. Happy are his children who come after him.
8 When the king sits on the throne to judge, He sifts out all evil with his eyes.
9 Who can say: “I have cleansed my heart; I am pure from my sin”?
10 Dishonest weights and false measures —Both are detestable to Jehovah.
11 Even a child is known by his actions, Whether his behavior is pure and right.
12 The hearing ear and the seeing eye —Jehovah has made both of them.
13 Do not love sleep, or you will come to poverty. Open your eyes, and you will be satisfied with bread.
14 “It is no good, it is no good!” says the buyer; Then he goes away and boasts about himself.
15 There is gold, also much coral, But the lips of knowledge are something precious.
16 Take a man’s garment if he has given security for a stranger; Seize the pledge from him if he did so for a foreign woman.
17 Bread gained by deceit tastes good to a man, But afterward his mouth will be full of gravel.
18 By consultation, plans will succeed, And by skillful direction wage your war.
19 A slanderer goes about revealing confidential talk; Do not associate with one who loves to gossip.
20 Whoever curses his father and his mother, His lamp will be extinguished when darkness comes.
21 An inheritance obtained first by greed Will not be a blessing in the end.
22 Do not say: “I will pay back evil!” Hope in Jehovah, and he will save you.
23 Dishonest weights are detestable to Jehovah, And deceptive scales are not good.
24 A man’s footsteps are directed by Jehovah; How can a man understand his own way?
25 It is a snare for a man to cry out rashly, “Holy!” And only later to give consideration to what he vowed.
26 A wise king sifts out the wicked And drives the threshing wheel over them.
27 The breath of a man is the lamp of Jehovah, Searching through his innermost being.
28 Loyal love and faithfulness safeguard the king; By loyal love he sustains his throne.
29 The glory of young men is their strength, And the splendor of old men is their gray hair.
30 Bruises and wounds purge away evil, And beatings cleanse one’s innermost being.
21 A king’s heart is like streams of water in Jehovah’s hand. He directs it wherever He pleases.
2 All of a man’s ways seem right to him, But Jehovah examines the hearts.
3 To do what is right and just Is more pleasing to Jehovah than a sacrifice.
4 Haughty eyes and an arrogant heart —The lamp that guides the wicked is sin.
5 The plans of the diligent surely lead to success, But all who are hasty surely head for poverty.
6 Gaining treasures by a lying tongue Is like a vanishing mist, a deadly snare.
7 The violence of the wicked will sweep them away, For they refuse to act with justice.
8 The way of a guilty man is crooked, But the activity of the pure man is upright.
9 Better to dwell on a corner of the roof Than in the same house with a quarrelsome wife.
10 The wicked man craves what is bad; He shows no favor toward his neighbor.
11 When a ridiculer is punished, the inexperienced become wiser, And when a wise person receives insight, he gains knowledge.
12 The Righteous One observes the house of the wicked one; He overthrows the wicked to their ruin.
13 Whoever stops up his ear to the cry of the lowly one Will himself call and not be answered.
14 A secret gift subdues anger, And a hidden bribe, fierce rage.
15 It is a joy for the righteous one to act with justice, But it is something terrible to those who practice evil.
16 The man who strays from the way of insight Will rest in the company of those powerless in death.
17 The one who loves having a good time will come to poverty; The one who loves wine and oil will not grow rich.
18 The wicked one is a ransom for the righteous one, And the treacherous one will be taken in place of the upright.
19 Better to dwell in the wilderness Than with a quarrelsome and irritable wife.
20 Precious treasure and oil are found in the house of the wise, But the stupid man will squander what he has.
21 Whoever pursues righteousness and loyal love Will find life, righteousness, and glory.
22 A wise man can scale the city of the mighty And undermine the strength in which they trust.
23 The one guarding his mouth and his tongue Keeps himself out of trouble.
24 A presumptuous, arrogant braggart is what you call The man who acts with reckless presumptuousness.
25 What the lazy man craves will put him to death, For his hands refuse to work.
26 All day long he greedily craves, But the righteous one gives, holding nothing back.
27 The sacrifice of the wicked is detestable. How much more when he offers it with evil intent!
28 A lying witness will perish, But the man who listens will testify with success.
29 The wicked man puts on a bold face, But it is the upright one whose course is sure.
30 There is no wisdom, nor discernment, nor counsel in opposition to Jehovah.
31 The horse is prepared for the day of battle, But salvation belongs to Jehovah.
22 A good name is to be chosen rather than great wealth; To be respected is better than silver and gold.
2 The rich and the poor have this in common: Jehovah made them both.
3 The shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself, But the inexperienced keep right on going and suffer the consequences.
4 The result of humility and the fear of Jehovah Is riches and glory and life.
5 Thorns and traps are in the crooked man’s path, But whoever values his life keeps far away from them.
6 Train a boy in the way he should go; Even when he grows old he will not depart from it.
7 The rich one rules the poor, And the borrower is a slave to the lender.
8 Whoever sows unrighteousness will reap disaster, And the rod of his fury will come to its end.
9 The generous person will be blessed, For he shares his food with the poor.
10 Drive away the scornful man, And contention will disappear; Disputes and insults will cease.
11 The one who loves a pure heart and whose speech is gracious Will have the king as his friend.
12 The eyes of Jehovah safeguard knowledge, But He overturns the words of the treacherous.
13 The lazy one says: “There is a lion outside! I will be killed in the middle of the public square!”
14 The mouth of wayward women is a deep pit. The one condemned by Jehovah will fall into it.
15 Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a boy, But the rod of discipline will remove it far from him.
16 The one defrauding the poor to increase his wealth And the one giving gifts to the rich Will end up in poverty.
17 Incline your ear and listen to the words of the wise, In order to apply your heart to my knowledge,
18 For it is pleasant to keep them deep within you, So that all of them may constantly be on your lips.
19 For your confidence to be in Jehovah, I am giving you knowledge today.
20 Have I not already written you, Imparting advice and knowledge,
21 To teach you true and reliable words, So that you can return with an accurate report to the one who sent you?
22 Do not rob the poor man because he is poor, And do not crush the lowly man in the city gate,
23 For Jehovah himself will plead their cause And he will take the life of those who defraud them.
24 Do not keep company with a hot-tempered man Or get involved with one disposed to rage,
25 So that you never learn his ways And ensnare yourself.
26 Do not be among those who shake hands in a pledge, Who put up security for loans.
27 If you have nothing to pay, Your bed will be taken right out from under you!
28 Do not move an ancient boundary marker That your forefathers put in place.
29 Have you seen a man skillful at his work? He will stand before kings; He will not stand before common men.
23 When you sit down to eat with a king, Carefully consider what is before you;
2 Put a knife to your throat If you have a large appetite.
3 Do not crave his delicacies, For it is deceptive food.
4 Do not wear yourself out to gain wealth. Stop and show understanding.
5 When you cast your eyes on it, it is not there, For it will surely sprout wings like an eagle and fly off into the sky.
6 Do not eat the food of a stingy person; Do not crave his delicacies,
7 For he is like one keeping accounts. “Eat and drink,” he says to you, but he does not mean it.
8 You will vomit up the morsels you have eaten And will have wasted your compliments.
9 Do not speak in the ears of the stupid one, For he will despise the wisdom of your words.
10 Do not move an ancient boundary marker Or encroach on the field of the fatherless.
11 For their Defender is strong; He will take up their cause against you.
12 Apply your heart to discipline And your ear to the sayings of knowledge.
13 Do not hold back discipline from a boy. If you strike him with the rod, he will not die.
14 With the rod you should strike him, In order to save him from the Grave.
15 My son, if your heart becomes wise, Then my own heart will rejoice.
16 My innermost being will find joy When your lips speak what is right.
17 Let your heart not envy sinners, But be in the fear of Jehovah all day long,
18 For then you will have a future And your hope will not be cut off.
19 Listen, my son, and become wise, And direct your heart in the right way.
20 Do not be among those who drink too much wine, Among those who gorge themselves on meat,
21 For a drunkard and a glutton will come to poverty, And drowsiness will clothe one with rags.
22 Listen to your father who caused your birth, And do not despise your mother just because she has grown old.
23 Buy truth and never sell it, Also wisdom and discipline and understanding.
24 The father of a righteous one will surely be joyful; Whoever fathers a wise son will rejoice in him.
25 Your father and your mother will rejoice, And she who gave birth to you will be joyful.
26 My son, do give your heart to me, And may your eyes take pleasure in my ways.
27 For a prostitute is a deep pit, And an immoral woman is a narrow well.
28 She lies in wait like a robber; She increases the number of unfaithful men.
29 Who has woe? Who has uneasiness? Who has quarrels? Who has complaints? Who has wounds for no reason? Who has bleary eyes?
30 Those lingering long over wine; Those searching out mixed wine.
31 Do not look at the wine’s red color As it sparkles in the cup and goes down smoothly,
32 For in the end it bites like a serpent, And it secretes poison like a viper.
33 Your eyes will see strange things, And your heart will speak perverse things.
34 And you will be like one lying down in the middle of the sea, Like one lying at the top of a ship’s mast.
35 You will say: “They have struck me, but I did not feel it. They beat me, but I did not know it. When will I wake up? I need another drink.”
24 Do not envy evil men, And do not crave their company,
2 For their heart meditates on violence, And their lips speak of trouble.
3 By wisdom a house is built up, And by discernment it is made secure.
4 By knowledge its rooms are filled With all sorts of precious and pleasant treasures.
5 A wise man is powerful, And with knowledge a man increases his power.
6 By skillful direction you will wage your war, And through many advisers there is victory.
7 True wisdom is unattainable for a fool; He has nothing to say in the city gate.
8 Anyone who plots evil Will be called a master schemer.
9 Foolish schemes are sinful, And people detest a ridiculer.
10 If you become discouraged in the day of distress, Your strength will be meager.
11 Rescue those who are being taken away to death, And hold back those staggering to the slaughter.
12 If you say, “But we did not know about this,” Does not the One who examines hearts discern it? Yes, the One who watches you will know And will repay each man according to his activity.
13 My son, eat honey, because it is good; Honey from the comb is sweet to the taste.
14 Likewise, know that wisdom is good for you. If you find it, you will have a future And your hope will not be cut off.
15 Do not wickedly lie in ambush near the home of the righteous one; Do not destroy his place of rest.
16 For the righteous one may fall seven times, and he will get up again, But the wicked will be made to stumble by calamity.
17 When your enemy falls, do not rejoice, And when he stumbles, do not let your heart be joyful;
18 Otherwise, Jehovah will see and be displeased, And He will turn away his anger from him.
19 Do not be upset because of evil men; Do not envy wicked people,
20 For there is no future for anyone evil; The lamp of the wicked will be extinguished.
21 My son, fear Jehovah and the king. And do not associate with dissenters,
22 For their disaster will arise suddenly. Who knows what ruin both will bring upon them?
23 These sayings also belong to the wise: Partiality in judgment is not good.
24 Whoever says to the wicked one, “You are righteous,” Will be cursed by the peoples and denounced by the nations.
25 But it will go well for those reproving him; Blessings of good things will come upon them.
26 People will kiss the lips of the one replying honestly.
27 Prepare your outside work, and get everything ready in the field; Then build your house.
28 Do not testify against your neighbor without grounds. Do not use your lips to deceive others.
29 Do not say: “I will do to him just as he has done to me; I will repay him for what he did.”
30 I passed by the field of the lazy one, By the vineyard of the man lacking good sense.
31 I saw that it was overgrown with weeds; The ground was covered with nettles, And its stone wall was broken down.
32 I observed this and took it to heart; I saw it and learned this lesson:
33 A little sleep, a little slumbering, A little folding of the hands to rest,
34 And your poverty will come like a bandit, And your want like an armed man.
25 These also are the proverbs of Solʹo·mon, which the men of Hez·e·kiʹah the king of Judah transcribed:
2 It is the glory of God to keep a matter secret, And the glory of kings is to search through a matter.
3 As the heavens are high and the earth is deep, So the heart of kings is unsearchable.
4 Remove the dross from the silver, And it will emerge completely refined.
5 Remove the wicked one from the king’s presence, And his throne will be firmly established in righteousness.
6 Do not honor yourself before the king, And do not take a place among the prominent,
7 For it is better for him to say to you, “Come up here,” Than to humiliate you in the presence of a noble.
8 Do not rush into a legal dispute, For what will you do later if your neighbor humiliates you?
9 Plead your case with your neighbor, But do not reveal what you were told confidentially,
10 So that the one listening will not put you to shame And you spread a bad report that cannot be recalled.
11 Like apples of gold in silver carvings Is a word spoken at the right time.
12 Like an earring of gold and an ornament of fine gold Is a wise reprover to the receptive ear.
13 Just like the coldness of snow on the day of harvest Is a faithful messenger to those who sent him, For he refreshes his master.
14 Like clouds and wind that bring no rain Is a man who boasts about a gift never given.
15 By patience a commander is won over, And a gentle tongue can break a bone.
16 If you find honey, eat only what you need, For if you take too much, you may vomit it up.
17 Rarely set foot in your neighbor’s house, So that he does not get tired of you and hate you.
18 Like a war club and a sword and a sharp arrow Is a man bearing false witness against his neighbor.
19 Like a broken tooth or an unsteady foot Is confidence in an unreliable person in times of trouble.
20 Like one who removes a garment on a cold day And like vinegar poured on soda Is the one who sings songs to a gloomy heart.
21 If your enemy is hungry, give him bread to eat; If he is thirsty, give him water to drink,
22 For you will be heaping burning coals on his head, And Jehovah will reward you.
23 The north wind brings a downpour, And a gossiping tongue brings an angry face.
24 Better to dwell on a corner of the roof Than in the same house with a quarrelsome wife.
25 Like cold water on a tired soul Is a good report from a distant land.
26 Like a muddied spring and a ruined well Is a righteous person who gives in to a wicked one.
27 It is not good to eat too much honey, Nor is it glorious to seek one’s own glory.
28 As a city broken through, without a wall, Is the man who cannot control his temper.
26 Like snow in summer and rain at harvesttime, Honor is not fitting for someone stupid.
2 Just as a bird has reason to flee and a swallow to fly, So a curse does not come without a real reason.
3 A whip is for the horse, a bridle is for the donkey, And the rod is for the back of stupid people.
4 Do not answer the stupid one according to his foolishness, So that you do not put yourself on his level.
5 Answer the stupid one according to his foolishness, So that he does not think he is wise.
6 Like someone who cripples his own feet and harms himself Is the one who entrusts matters to someone stupid.
7 Like the limp legs of the lame, So is a proverb in the mouth of stupid people.
8 Like tying a stone to a sling, So is giving glory to someone stupid.
9 Like a thorn plant that comes into the hand of a drunkard, So is a proverb in the mouth of stupid people.
10 Like an archer who wounds at random, So is the one who hires the stupid one or those passing by.
11 Like a dog that returns to its vomit, The stupid one repeats his foolishness.
12 Have you seen a man who thinks he is wise? There is more hope for someone stupid than for him.
13 The lazy one says: “There is a young lion in the road, A lion in the public square!”
14 A door keeps turning on its hinges, And the lazy one on his bed.
15 The lazy one buries his hand in the banquet bowl, But he is too tired to bring it back to his mouth.
16 The lazy one thinks he is wiser Than seven people who give a sensible reply.
17 Like someone grabbing hold of a dog’s ears Is the one passing by who becomes furious about a quarrel that is not his.
18 Like a madman who shoots fiery missiles, arrows, and death
19 Is the man who plays a trick on his neighbor and says, “I was only joking!”
20 Where there is no wood, the fire goes out, And where there is no slanderer, quarreling ceases.
21 As charcoal for the embers and wood for the fire, So a contentious man kindles a quarrel.
22 The words of a slanderer are like tasty morsels; They are gulped right down into the stomach.
23 Like a silver glazing over a piece of earthenware Are affectionate words from an evil heart.
24 The one who hates others disguises it with his lips, But inside he harbors deceit.
25 Although he speaks graciously, do not trust him, For there are seven detestable things in his heart.
26 Though his hatred is concealed by deceit, His evil will be exposed in the congregation.
27 The one who digs a pit will fall into it, And whoever rolls away a stone—it will come back on him.
28 A lying tongue hates those crushed by it, And a flattering mouth causes ruin.
27 Do not boast about tomorrow, For you do not know what a day will bring.
2 Let someone else praise you, and not your own mouth; Others, and not your own lips.
3 A stone is heavy and sand is weighty, But the irritation caused by a fool is heavier than both.
4 There is the cruelty of rage and the flood of anger, But who can withstand jealousy?
5 Open reproof is better than concealed love.
6 The wounds inflicted by a friend are faithful, But an enemy’s kisses are plentiful.
7 One whose appetite is satisfied turns down honey from the comb, But to the hungry, even what is bitter tastes sweet.
8 Like a bird that strays from its nest Is a man who strays from his home.
9 Oil and incense make the heart rejoice; So does sweet friendship springing from sincere counsel.
10 Do not forsake your friend or your father’s friend, And do not enter your own brother’s house on the day of your disaster; Better is a neighbor nearby than a brother far away.
11 Be wise, my son, and make my heart rejoice, So that I can make a reply to him who taunts me.
12 The shrewd person sees the danger and conceals himself, But the inexperienced keep right on going and suffer the consequences.
13 Take a man’s garment if he has given security for a stranger; Seize the pledge from him if he did so for a foreign woman.
14 When someone blesses his fellow man with a loud voice early in the morning, It will be counted as a curse to him.
15 A quarrelsome wife is like a constantly leaking roof on a rainy day.
16 Whoever can restrain her can restrain the wind And can grip oil with his right hand.
17 As iron sharpens iron, So one man sharpens his friend.
18 The one who cares for a fig tree will eat its fruit, And the one who takes care of his master will be honored.
19 As water reflects one’s face, So the heart of one man reflects another’s.
20 The Grave and the place of destruction are never satisfied, Nor are a man’s eyes ever satisfied.
21 As the refining pot is for silver and the furnace for gold, So a person is tested by the praise he receives.
22 Even if you pound a fool with a pestle Like crushed grain in a mortar, His foolishness will not leave him.
23 You should know well the appearance of your flock. Take good care of your sheep,
24 For wealth does not last forever, Nor a crown for all generations.
25 The green grass disappears, new grass appears, And the vegetation of the mountains is gathered in.
26 The young rams provide your clothing, And the male goats provide the price of a field.
27 And there will be enough goat’s milk to feed you, To feed your household, and to sustain your servant girls.
28 The wicked flee when no one pursues them, But the righteous are as confident as a lion.
2 When there is transgression in the land, it will have one prince after another, But with the help of a man of discernment and knowledge, a prince will long endure.
3 A poor man who defrauds the lowly Is like a rain that sweeps away all the food.
4 Those who abandon the law praise the wicked one, But those who observe the law are indignant with them.
5 Evil men cannot understand justice, But those who seek Jehovah can understand everything.
6 Better is a poor man who walks in his integrity Than a rich man whose ways are corrupt.
7 An understanding son observes the law, But a companion of gluttons disgraces his father.
8 The one who increases his wealth by interest and usury Amasses it for the one who shows favor to the poor.
9 The one refusing to listen to the law —Even his prayer is detestable.
10 The one misleading the upright into an evil course will fall into his own pit, But the blameless will inherit what is good.
11 A rich man is wise in his own eyes, But a poor man with discernment can see through him.
12 When the righteous triumph, there is great glory, But when the wicked rise to power, people go into hiding.
13 The one covering over his transgressions will not succeed, But whoever confesses and abandons them will be shown mercy.
14 Happy is the man who is always on guard, But whoever hardens his heart will fall into calamity.
15 Like a growling lion and a charging bear Is a wicked ruler over a helpless people.
16 A leader without discernment abuses his power, But the one hating dishonest profit will prolong his life.
17 A man burdened with bloodguilt for taking someone’s life will keep fleeing until the grave. Let no one support him.
18 The one walking faultlessly will be saved, But the one whose ways are crooked will suddenly fall.
19 The one cultivating his ground will have plenty of bread, But the one taking up worthless pursuits will have his fill of poverty.
20 A faithful man will receive many blessings, But the one hastening to get rich will not remain innocent.
21 It is not good to show partiality; But a man might do wrong for a piece of bread.
22 An envious man is eager for wealth, Not knowing that poverty will overtake him.
23 Whoever reproves a man will afterward find more favor Than someone who flatters with his tongue.
24 Whoever robs his father and mother and says, “It is not wrong,” Is a partner of the man who causes ruin.
25 The greedy person stirs up dissension, But whoever relies on Jehovah will prosper.
26 Whoever trusts in his own heart is stupid, But the one who walks in wisdom will escape.
27 Whoever gives to the poor will lack nothing, But the one who closes his eyes to them will receive many curses.
28 When the wicked rise to power, a man hides himself, But when they perish, the righteous increase.
29 A man who stiffens his neck after much reproof Will suddenly be broken beyond healing.
2 When the righteous are many, the people rejoice, But when the wicked one rules, the people groan.
3 A man who loves wisdom makes his father rejoice, But the one who keeps company with prostitutes squanders his wealth.
4 By justice a king brings stability to a land, But a man seeking bribes brings it to ruin.
5 A man who flatters his neighbor Spreads out a net for his feet.
6 A bad man’s transgression ensnares him, But the righteous one cries out joyfully and rejoices.
7 The righteous one is concerned about the legal rights of the poor, But the wicked one has no such concern.
8 Boastful men inflame a town, But those who are wise turn away anger.
9 When a wise man enters into a controversy with a fool, There will be ranting and ridicule, but no satisfaction.
10 Bloodthirsty men hate anyone innocent, And they seek to take the life of the upright.
11 A stupid person gives vent to all his feelings, But the wise one calmly keeps them in check.
12 When a ruler pays attention to lies, All his servants will be wicked.
13 The poor man and the oppressor have this in common: Jehovah gives light to the eyes of both.
14 When a king judges the poor fairly, His throne will always be secure.
15 The rod and reproof impart wisdom, But a child left unrestrained brings shame on his mother.
16 When the wicked increase, transgression increases, But the righteous will see their downfall.
17 Discipline your son and he will bring you rest; And he will give you great pleasure.
18 Where there is no vision, the people go unrestrained, But happy are those who observe the law.
19 A servant will not let himself be corrected by words, For though he understands, he does not obey.
20 Have you seen a man hasty with his words? There is more hope for a fool than for him.
21 If a servant is pampered from his youth, He will become thankless later on.
22 A man prone to anger stirs up strife; Anyone disposed to rage commits many transgressions.
23 The haughtiness of a man will humble him, But whoever is humble in spirit will obtain glory.
24 The partner of a thief hates himself. He may hear the call to testify, but he reports nothing.
25 Trembling at men is a snare, But the one trusting in Jehovah will be protected.
26 Many seek an audience with a ruler, But it is from Jehovah that a man gets justice.
27 An unjust man is detestable to the righteous, But the one whose way is upright is detestable to the wicked one.
30 The weighty message contained in the words of Aʹgur son of Jaʹkeh, which he spoke to Ithʹi·el, to Ithʹi·el and Uʹcal.
2 I am more ignorant than anyone else, And I lack the understanding a man should have.
3 I have not learned wisdom, And I do not possess the knowledge of the Most Holy One.
4 Who has ascended to heaven and then descended? Who has gathered the wind in the palms of both hands? Who has wrapped up the waters in his garment? Who has established all the ends of the earth? What is his name and the name of his son—if you know?
5 Every saying of God is refined. He is a shield to those taking refuge in him.
6 Add nothing to his words, Or he will reprove you, And you will be proved a liar.
7 Two things I ask of you. Do not withhold them from me before I die.
8 Remove untruth and lies far from me. Give me neither poverty nor riches. Just let me consume my portion of food,
9 So that I do not become satisfied and deny you and say, “Who is Jehovah?” Nor let me become poor and steal and dishonor the name of my God.
10 Do not slander a servant to his master, Or he may curse you and you will be found guilty.
11 There is a generation that curses its father And does not bless its mother.
12 There is a generation that is pure in its own eyes But has not been cleansed from its filth.
13 There is a generation whose eyes are so haughty And whose eyes look so arrogantly!
14 There is a generation whose teeth are swords And whose jaws are slaughtering knives; They devour the lowly ones of the earth And the poor from among mankind.
15 The leeches have two daughters that cry, “Give! Give!” There are three things that do not get satisfied, Four that never say, “Enough!”
16 —The Grave and a barren womb, A land that is deprived of water, And fire that never says, “Enough!”
17 The eye that mocks a father and despises obedience to a mother —The ravens of the valley will peck it out, And the young eagles will eat it up.
18 There are three things that are beyond my comprehension, And four that I do not understand:
19 The way of an eagle in the heavens, The way of a serpent on a rock, The way of a ship in the open sea, And the way of a man with a young woman.
20 This is the way of an adulterous woman: She eats, she wipes her mouth; Then she says, “I have done nothing wrong.”
21 There are three things that make the earth shudder And four things it cannot endure:
22 When a slave rules as king, When a fool is glutted with food,
23 When a hated woman is taken as a wife, And when a servant girl takes the place of her mistress.
24 Four things on earth are among the smallest, But they are instinctively wise:
25 The ants are not strong creatures, Yet they prepare their food in the summer.
26 The rock badgers are not mighty creatures, Yet they make their house in the crags.
27 The locusts have no king, Yet they all go forward in formation.
28 The gecko lizard clings with its feet, And it goes into the palace of a king.
29 There are three things that have an impressive stride, Four that are impressive as they move:
30 The lion, the mightiest among beasts, Which does not retreat from anyone;
31 The greyhound; the male goat; And a king whose army is with him.
32 If you have foolishly exalted yourself Or if you have schemed to do so, Put your hand over your mouth.
33 For as the churning of milk produces butter And the squeezing of the nose produces blood, So the stirring up of anger produces quarrels.
31 The words of King Lemʹu·el, the weighty message his mother gave to instruct him:
2 What should I tell you, O my son, What, O son of my womb, And what, O son of my vows?
3 Do not give your vigor to women, Nor follow ways that destroy kings.
4 It is not for kings, O Lemʹu·el, It is not for kings to drink wine Nor for rulers to say, “Where is my drink?”
5 So that they do not drink and forget what is decreed And pervert the rights of the lowly ones.
6 Give alcohol to those who are perishing And wine to those in bitter distress.
7 Let them drink and forget their poverty; Let them remember their trouble no more.
8 Speak up in behalf of the speechless; Defend the rights of all who are perishing.
9 Speak up and judge righteously; Defend the rights of the lowly and the poor.
10 Who can find a capable wife? Her value is far more than that of corals.
11 Her husband trusts her from his heart, And he lacks nothing of value.
12 She rewards him with good, not bad, All the days of her life.
13 She obtains wool and linen; She delights to work with her hands.
14 She is like the ships of a merchant, Bringing her food in from afar.
15 She also rises while it is still night, Providing food for her household And portions for her female servants.
16 She sets her mind on a field and buys it; She plants a vineyard from her own labors.
17 She prepares herself for hard work, And she strengthens her arms.
18 She sees that her trading is profitable; Her lamp does not go out at night.
19 Her hands seize the distaff, And her hands take hold of the spindle.
20 She extends her palm to the lowly one, And she opens her hands to the poor.
21 She does not worry about her household because of the snow, For her whole household is clothed in warm garments.
22 She makes her own bed covers. Her clothing is of linen and purple wool.
23 Her husband is well-known in the city gates, Where he sits among the elders of the land.
24 She makes and sells linen garments And supplies belts to the merchants.
25 She is clothed with strength and splendor, And she looks to the future with confidence.
26 She opens her mouth in wisdom; The law of kindness is on her tongue.
27 She watches over the activity of her household, And the bread of laziness she does not eat.
28 Her children rise up and declare her happy; Her husband rises up and praises her.
29 There are many capable women, But you—you surpass them all.
30 Charm may be false, and beauty may be fleeting, But the woman who fears Jehovah will be praised.
31 Give her the reward for what she does, And let her works praise her in the city gates.
1 The words of the congregator, the son of David, the king in Jerusalem.
2 “The greatest futility!” says the congregator, “The greatest futility! Everything is futile!”
3 What does a person gain from all his hard work At which he toils under the sun?
4 A generation is going, and a generation is coming, But the earth remains forever.
5 The sun rises, and the sun sets; Then it hurries back to the place where it rises again.
6 The wind goes south and circles around to the north; Round and round it continuously circles; the wind keeps making its rounds.
7 All the streams flow into the sea, yet the sea is not full. To the place from which the streams flow, there they return so as to flow again.
8 All things are wearisome; No one can even speak of it. The eye is not satisfied at seeing; Nor is the ear filled from hearing.
9 What has been is what will be, And what has been done will be done again; There is nothing new under the sun.
10 Is there anything of which one may say, “Look at this—it is new”? It already existed from long ago; It already existed before our time.
11 No one remembers people of former times; Nor will anyone remember those who come later; Nor will they be remembered by those who come still later.
12 I, the congregator, have been king over Israel in Jerusalem.
13 I set my heart to study and explore with wisdom everything that has been done under the heavens—the miserable occupation that God has given to the sons of men that keeps them occupied.
14 I saw all the works that were done under the sun, And look! everything was futile, a chasing after the wind.
15 What is crooked cannot be made straight, And what is lacking cannot possibly be counted.
16 Then I said in my heart: “Look! I have acquired great wisdom, more than anyone who was before me in Jerusalem, and my heart gained a great deal of wisdom and knowledge.”
17 I applied my heart to knowing wisdom and to knowing madness and to knowing folly, and this too is a chasing after the wind.
18 For an abundance of wisdom brings an abundance of frustration, So that whoever increases knowledge increases pain.
2 Then I said in my heart: “Come and let me try out pleasure and see what good comes.” But look! that too was futility.
2 I said about laughter, “It is madness!” And about pleasure, “What use is it?”
3 I explored with my heart by indulging myself with wine, all the while maintaining my own wisdom; I even embraced foolishness to find out what was the best thing for humans to do during their few days of life under the heavens.
4 I undertook great works. I built houses for myself; I planted vineyards for myself.
5 I made gardens and parks for myself, and I planted in them all sorts of fruit trees.
6 I made pools of water for myself, to irrigate a grove of flourishing trees.
7 I acquired male and female servants, and I had servants born in my household. I also acquired much livestock—cattle and flocks—more than any of my predecessors in Jerusalem.
8 I accumulated silver and gold for myself, the treasures of kings and of provinces. I gathered male and female singers for myself, as well as what brings great pleasure to the sons of men—a woman, yes, many women.
9 So I grew great and surpassed anyone prior to me in Jerusalem. And my wisdom remained with me.
10 I did not deny myself anything that I desired. I did not withhold from my heart any sort of pleasure, for my heart was joyful because of all my hard work, and this was my reward for all my hard work.
11 But when I reflected on all the works that my own hands had done and on all the hard work that I had toiled to accomplish, I saw that everything was futile, a chasing after the wind; there was nothing of real value under the sun.
12 Then I turned my attention to wisdom and madness and folly. (For what can the man do who comes after the king? Only what has already been done.)
13 And I saw that there is an advantage to wisdom over folly, just as there is an advantage to light over darkness.
14 The wise one has his eyes in his head; but the stupid one is walking in darkness. I have also come to realize that there is one outcome that befalls all of them.
15 Then I said in my heart: “What happens to the stupid one will also happen to me.” What, then, did I gain by becoming excessively wise? So I said in my heart: “This too is futility.”
16 For there is no lasting memory either of the wise one or of the stupid one. In the days to come, everyone will be forgotten. And how will the wise one die? Along with the stupid one.
17 So I came to hate life, because everything being done under the sun seemed distressing to me, for everything was futile, a chasing after the wind.
18 I came to hate all that I had worked so hard for under the sun, because I must leave it behind for the man coming after me.
19 And who knows whether he will be wise or foolish? Yet he will take control over all the things I spent great effort and wisdom to acquire under the sun. This too is futility.
20 So I began to despair in my heart over all the hard work at which I had toiled under the sun.
21 For a man may work hard, guided by wisdom and knowledge and skill, but he must hand over his portion to a man who did not work for it. This too is futility and a great tragedy.
22 What does a man really gain from all his hard work and ambition that drives him to work hard under the sun?
23 For during all his days, his occupation brings pain and frustration, and even at night his heart does not rest. This too is futility.
24 There is nothing better for a man than to eat and drink and find enjoyment in his hard work. This too, I have realized, is from the hand of the true God,
25 for who eats and who drinks better than I do?
26 To the man who pleases him he gives wisdom and knowledge and rejoicing, but to the sinner he gives the occupation of gathering and merely collecting to give to the one who pleases the true God. This too is futility, a chasing after the wind.
3 There is an appointed time for everything, A time for every activity under the heavens:
2 A time for birth and a time to die; A time to plant and a time to uproot what was planted;
3 A time to kill and a time to heal; A time to tear down and a time to build up;
4 A time to weep and a time to laugh; A time to wail and a time to dance;
5 A time to throw stones away and a time to gather stones together; A time to embrace and a time to refrain from embracing;
6 A time to search and a time to give up as lost; A time to keep and a time to throw away;
7 A time to rip apart and a time to sew together; A time to be silent and a time to speak;
8 A time to love and a time to hate; A time for war and a time for peace.
9 What does the worker gain from all his efforts?
10 I have seen the occupation that God has given to the sons of men to keep them occupied.
11 He has made everything beautiful in its time. He has even put eternity in their heart; yet mankind will never find out the work that the true God has made from start to finish.
12 I have concluded that there is nothing better for them than to rejoice and to do good during their life,
13 also that everyone should eat and drink and find enjoyment for all his hard work. It is the gift of God.
14 I have come to know that everything the true God makes will endure forever. There is nothing to add to it and nothing to subtract from it. The true God has made it this way, so that people will fear him.
15 Whatever happens has already happened, and what is to come has already been; but the true God seeks what has been pursued.
16 I have also seen this under the sun: In the place of justice there was wickedness, and in the place of righteousness there was wickedness.
17 So I said in my heart: “The true God will judge both the righteous and the wicked, for there is a time for every activity and every action.”
18 I also said in my heart about the sons of men that the true God will test them and show them that they are like animals,
19 for there is an outcome for humans and an outcome for animals; they all have the same outcome. As the one dies, so the other dies; and they all have but one spirit. So man has no superiority over animals, for everything is futile.
20 All are going to the same place. They all come from the dust, and they all are returning to the dust.
21 Who really knows whether the spirit of humans ascends upward, and whether the spirit of animals descends down to the earth?
22 And I saw that there is nothing better than for a man to find enjoyment in his work, because that is his reward; for who can enable him to see what will happen after he is gone?
4 Again I turned my attention to all the acts of oppression that go on under the sun. I saw the tears of the oppressed, and there was no one to comfort them. And their oppressors had the power, and there was no one to comfort them.
2 And I congratulated the dead who had already died rather than the living who were still alive.
3 And better off than both of them is the one who has not yet been born, who has not seen the distressing deeds that are done under the sun.
4 And I have seen how much effort and skillful work spring from rivalry between people; this too is futility, a chasing after the wind.
5 The stupid one folds his hands while his flesh wastes away.
6 Better is a handful of rest than two handfuls of hard work and chasing after the wind.
7 I turned my attention to another example of futility under the sun:
8 There is a man who is all alone, without any companion; he has no son or brother, but there is no end to all his hard work. His eyes are never satisfied with riches. But does he ask himself, ‘For whom am I working hard and depriving myself of good things’? This too is futility and a miserable occupation.
9 Two are better than one because they have a good reward for their hard work.
10 For if one of them falls, the other can help his partner up. But what will happen to the one who falls with no one to help him up?
11 Moreover, if two lie down together, they will stay warm, but how can just one keep warm?
12 And someone may overpower one alone, but two together can take a stand against him. And a threefold cord cannot quickly be torn apart.
13 Better is a poor but wise child than an old but stupid king, who no longer has enough sense to heed a warning.
14 For he went out from prison to become king, although in that one’s kingship he was born poor.
15 I considered all those alive who walk about under the sun, as well as how it goes with the young successor who stands up in the other’s place.
16 Although there is no end to all his supporters, those who come later will not be happy with him. This too is futility, a chasing after the wind.
5 Watch your step whenever you go to the house of the true God; it is better to draw near to listen than to give a sacrifice as the stupid ones do, for they are not aware that what they are doing is bad.
2 Do not be quick with your mouth, nor let your heart speak rashly before the true God, for the true God is in the heavens but you are on the earth. That is why your words should be few.
3 For a dream comes from too many preoccupations, and the chatter of the stupid one comes from too many words.
4 Whenever you make a vow to God, do not delay to pay it, for he finds no pleasure in the stupid ones. What you vow, pay.
5 Better for you not to vow than to vow and not pay.
6 Do not allow your mouth to cause you to sin, and do not say before the angel that it was a mistake. Why make the true God indignant over what you say so that he has to destroy the work of your hands?
7 For just as many preoccupations lead to dreams, so, too, many words lead to futility. But fear the true God.
8 If you see any oppression of the poor and a violation of justice and righteousness in your district, do not be surprised about the matter. For that high official is being watched by one who is higher than he is, and there are others who are still higher than them.
9 Also, the profit of the land is divided among them all; even the king is served by the field.
10 A lover of silver will never be satisfied with silver, nor a lover of wealth with income. This too is futility.
11 When good things increase, those consuming them increase. And what advantage is it to the owner, except to look at them with his eyes?
12 Sweet is the sleep of the one serving, whether he eats little or much, but the plenty belonging to the rich one does not permit him to sleep.
13 There is a great tragedy that I have seen under the sun: riches that were hoarded by their owner to his own harm.
14 Those riches were lost because of a disastrous venture, and when he becomes a father to a son, he has nothing left in his possession.
15 Just as one came from his mother’s womb, naked he will go away, just as he came. And he cannot carry away anything for all his hard work.
16 This too is a great tragedy: Exactly as he came, so he will go away; and what profit is there to the one who keeps working hard for the wind?
17 Also, every day he eats in darkness, with a great deal of frustration and sickness and anger.
18 This is what I have seen to be good and proper: that one should eat and drink and find enjoyment for all the hard work at which he toils under the sun during the few days of life that the true God has given him, for that is his reward.
19 Also, when the true God gives a man riches and material possessions along with the ability to enjoy them, he should take his reward and rejoice in his hard work. This is the gift of God.
20 For he will hardly notice the passing days of his life, because the true God keeps him preoccupied with the rejoicing of his heart.
6 There is another tragedy that I have seen under the sun, and it is common among men:
2 The true God gives a man riches and material possessions and glory, so that he lacks nothing that he desires; yet the true God does not enable him to enjoy them, although a stranger may enjoy them. This is futility and a severe affliction.
3 If a man should become a father a hundred times and live for many years and reach old age, yet he does not enjoy his good things before he reaches the grave, I must say that a stillborn child is better off than he is.
4 For this one came in vain and went away in darkness, and his name is shrouded in darkness.
5 Even though he never saw the sun or knew anything, he is still better off than the former one.
6 What is the benefit of living a thousand years twice over but not experiencing enjoyment? Do not all go to the same place?
7 All the hard work of a man is to fill his mouth; yet his appetite is never satisfied.
8 For what advantage does the wise one have over the stupid one, or of what benefit is it that the poor man knows how to survive?
9 Better to enjoy what the eyes see than to wander after one’s desires. This too is futility, a chasing after the wind.
10 Whatever has come to be has already been named, and it is known what man is; and he is not able to dispute with the one more powerful than he.
11 The more words, the more futility; and what advantage do they bring to man?
12 Who knows what is best for a man to do in life during the few days of his futile life, which he spends like a shadow? For who can tell man what will happen under the sun after he is gone?
7 A good name is better than good oil, and the day of death is better than the day of birth.
2 Better to go to the house of mourning than to the house of feasting, for that is the end of every man, and the living should take it to heart.
3 Better is distress than laughter, for the sadness of the face makes the heart better.
4 The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning, but the heart of the stupid is in the house of rejoicing.
5 Better to listen to a wise man’s rebuke than to listen to the song of fools.
6 For as the crackling of thorns burning under the pot, so is the laughter of the fool; and this too is futility.
7 But oppression can drive the wise one into madness, and a bribe corrupts the heart.
8 Better is the end of a matter than its beginning. Better to be patient than to be haughty in spirit.
9 Do not be quick to take offense, for the taking of offense lodges in the bosom of fools.
10 Do not say, “Why were the former days better than these?” for it is not out of wisdom that you ask this.
11 Wisdom together with an inheritance is a good thing and an advantage to those who see the light of day.
12 For wisdom is a protection just as money is a protection, but the advantage of knowledge is this: Wisdom preserves the life of its owner.
13 Consider the work of the true God, for who can straighten out what he has made crooked?
14 On a good day, reflect this goodness, but on the day of adversity, consider that God made the one as well as the other, so that men cannot be certain of anything that will happen to them in the future.
15 During my futile life I have seen everything—from the righteous one who perishes in his righteousness to the wicked one who lives long despite his badness.
16 Do not be overly righteous, nor show yourself excessively wise. Why should you bring ruin to yourself?
17 Do not be excessively wicked, nor be foolish. Why should you die before your time?
18 It is best to grasp one warning without letting go of the other; for the one who fears God will heed them both.
19 Wisdom makes a wise man more powerful than ten strong men in a city.
20 For there is no righteous man on earth who always does good and never sins.
21 Also, do not take to heart every word that people say; otherwise, you may hear your servant calling down evil on you;
22 for you well know in your heart that many times you yourself have called down evil on others.
23 All of this I tested with wisdom, and I said: “I will become wise.” But it was beyond me.
24 What has come to be is out of reach and exceedingly deep. Who can understand it?
25 I directed my heart to know and to explore and to search for wisdom and the reason behind things, and to understand the wickedness of stupidity and the folly of madness.
26 Then I discovered this: More bitter than death is the woman who is like a hunter’s net, whose heart is like dragnets, and whose hands are like prison chains. The one who pleases the true God will escape her, but the sinner is captured by her.
27 “See, this is what I found,” says the congregator. “I investigated one thing after another to reach my conclusion,
28 but what I continually sought, I have not found. One man out of a thousand I found, but a woman among them I have not found.
29 This alone I have found: The true God made mankind upright, but they have sought out many schemes.”
8 Who is like the wise man? Who knows the solution to a problem? A man’s wisdom lights up his face and softens his stern appearance.
2 I say: “Obey the king’s orders out of regard for the oath to God.
3 Do not rush to depart from his presence. Do not take a stand for anything bad; for he can do whatever he pleases,
4 because the word of the king is absolute; who can say to him, ‘What are you doing?’”
5 The one who observes the commandment will not experience harm, and the wise heart will know the right time and procedure.
6 For every matter there is a time and procedure, because the troubles of mankind are so abundant.
7 Since no one knows what will happen, who can tell him how it will happen?
8 Just as no man has power over the spirit or can restrain the spirit, so no one has power over the day of death. Just as no one is discharged during a war, so wickedness will not allow those who practice it to escape.
9 All of this I have seen, and I applied my heart to every work that has been done under the sun, during the time that man has dominated man to his harm.
10 And I saw the wicked being buried, those who used to go in and out of the holy place, but they were soon forgotten in the city where they acted that way. This too is futility.
11 Because sentence against a bad deed has not been executed speedily, the heart of men becomes emboldened to do bad.
12 Although a sinner may do bad a hundred times and still live a long time, yet I am aware that it will turn out well for those who fear the true God, because they fear him.
13 But it will not turn out well for the wicked one, nor will he prolong his days that are like a shadow, because he does not fear God.
14 There is something futile that takes place on the earth: There are righteous people who are treated as if they had acted wickedly, and there are wicked people who are treated as if they had acted righteously. I say that this too is futility.
15 So I recommended rejoicing, because there is nothing better for man under the sun than to eat and drink and rejoice; this should accompany him as he works hard during the days of his life, which the true God gives him under the sun.
16 I applied my heart to acquire wisdom and to see all the activity happening on the earth, even going without sleep day and night.
17 Then I considered all the work of the true God, and I realized that mankind cannot comprehend what happens under the sun. No matter how hard men try, they cannot comprehend it. Even if they claim that they are wise enough to know, they cannot really comprehend it.
9 So I took all of this to heart and concluded that the righteous and the wise, as well as their works, are in the hands of the true God. Men are not aware of the love and the hate that took place prior to them.
2 All have the very same outcome, the righteous and the wicked, the good and the clean and the unclean, those sacrificing and those not sacrificing. The good one is the same as the sinner; the one who swears an oath is the same as the one who is cautious about swearing an oath.
3 This is a distressing thing that happens under the sun: Because all have the same outcome, the heart of humans is also full of bad; and there is madness in their heart during their life, and then they die!
4 There is hope for whoever is among the living, because a live dog is better off than a dead lion.
5 For the living know that they will die, but the dead know nothing at all, nor do they have any more reward, because all memory of them is forgotten.
6 Also, their love and their hate and their jealousy have already perished, and they no longer have any share in what is done under the sun.
7 Go, eat your food with rejoicing, and drink your wine with a cheerful heart, for already the true God has found pleasure in your works.
8 May your clothing always be white, and do not fail to put oil on your head.
9 Enjoy life with your beloved wife all the days of your futile life, which He has given you under the sun, all the days of your futility, for that is your lot in life and in your hard work at which you toil under the sun.
10 Whatever your hand finds to do, do with all your might, for there is no work nor planning nor knowledge nor wisdom in the Grave, where you are going.
11 I have seen something further under the sun, that the swift do not always win the race, nor do the mighty win the battle, nor do the wise always have the food, nor do the intelligent always have the riches, nor do those with knowledge always have success, because time and unexpected events overtake them all.
12 For man does not know his time. Just as fish are caught in an evil net and birds are caught in a trap, so the sons of men are ensnared in a time of disaster, when it suddenly overtakes them.
13 I also observed this about wisdom under the sun—and it impressed me:
14 There was a small city with a few men in it; and a mighty king came against it and surrounded it and built great siegeworks against it.
15 In it was found a poor but wise man, and he saved the city by his wisdom. But no one remembered that poor man.
16 And I said to myself: ‘Wisdom is better than mightiness; yet a poor man’s wisdom is despised, and his words are not heeded.’
17 Better to heed the calm words of the wise than the shouts of the one ruling among fools.
18 Wisdom is better than weapons of war, but just one sinner can destroy much good.
10 As dead flies cause the perfumer’s oil to stink and bubble, so a little foolishness outweighs wisdom and glory.
2 The heart of the wise one leads him in the right way, but the heart of the stupid one leads him in the wrong way.
3 In whatever way the fool walks, he is lacking good sense, and he lets everyone know that he is a fool.
4 If the anger of a ruler should flare up against you, do not leave your place, for calmness allays great sins.
5 There is something distressing that I have seen under the sun, the sort of mistake made by those in power:
6 Foolishness is put in many high positions, but the rich remain in low positions.
7 I have seen servants on horseback but princes walking on foot just like servants.
8 The one who digs a pit may fall into it; and the one who breaks through a stone wall may be bitten by a snake.
9 The one who quarries stones may be hurt by them, and the one who splits logs may be endangered by them.
10 If an iron tool is dull and one does not sharpen its edge, he will need to exert much effort. But wisdom helps to achieve success.
11 If the snake bites before it is charmed, there is no advantage to the skilled charmer.
12 The words from the mouth of the wise one bring favor, but the lips of the stupid one are his ruin.
13 The first words out of his mouth are foolishness, and his last words are disastrous madness.
14 But the fool keeps on speaking. A man does not know what will happen; who can tell him what will come after him?
15 The hard work of the stupid one wears him out, for he does not even know how to find his way to the city.
16 How terrible for a land when the king is a boy and the princes start their feasting in the morning!
17 How happy for the land when the king is the son of nobles and the princes eat at the proper time for strength, not for drunkenness!
18 Because of extreme laziness the roof beams sag, and because of idle hands the house leaks.
19 Bread is made for laughter, and wine makes life enjoyable; but money answers every need.
20 Even in your thoughts, do not curse the king, and do not curse the rich in your bedroom; for a bird may convey the sound, or a creature with wings may repeat what was said.
11 Cast your bread on the waters, for after many days you will find it again.
2 Give a share to seven or even to eight, for you do not know what disaster will occur on the earth.
3 If the clouds are filled with water, they will pour down rain on the earth; and if a tree falls to the south or to the north, the place where the tree falls is where it will lie.
4 The one who watches the wind will not sow seed, and the one who looks at the clouds will not reap.
5 Just as you do not know how the spirit operates in the bones of the child inside a pregnant woman, so you do not know the work of the true God, who does all things.
6 Sow your seed in the morning and do not let your hand rest until the evening; for you do not know which will have success, whether this one or that one, or whether they will both do well.
7 Light is sweet, and it is good for the eyes to see the sun.
8 For if a man should live many years, let him enjoy them all. But he should remember that the days of darkness may be many; all that is to come is futility.
9 Rejoice, young man, while you are young, and let your heart be glad in the days of your youth. Follow the ways of your heart and go where your eyes lead you; but know that the true God will bring you into judgment for all these things.
10 So remove troublesome things from your heart, and ward off harmful things from your body, for youth and the prime of life are futility.
12 Remember, then, your Grand Creator in the days of your youth, before the days of distress come and the years arrive when you will say: “I have no pleasure in them”;
2 before the sun and the light and the moon and the stars grow dark, and the clouds return after the downpour;
3 in the day when the guards of the house become shaky, and the strong men stoop over, and the women quit grinding because they have become few, and the ladies looking out the windows find it dark;
4 when the doors to the street have been closed, when the sound of the grinding mill becomes low, when one gets up at the sound of a bird, and all the daughters of song grow faint.
5 Also, one is afraid of heights, and there are terrors in the street. And the almond tree blossoms, and the grasshopper drags itself along, and the caper berry bursts, because man is walking to his lasting house and the mourners walk about in the street;
6 before the silver cord is removed, and the golden bowl is crushed, and the jar at the spring is broken, and the waterwheel for the cistern is crushed.
7 Then the dust returns to the earth, just as it was, and the spirit returns to the true God who gave it.
8 “The greatest futility!” says the congregator. “Everything is futile.”
9 Not only had the congregator become wise but he continually taught the people what he knew, and he pondered and made a thorough search in order to compile many proverbs.
10 The congregator sought to find delightful words and to record accurate words of truth.
11 The words of the wise are like oxgoads, and their collected sayings are like firmly embedded nails; they have been given from one shepherd.
12 As for anything besides these, my son, be warned: To the making of many books there is no end, and much devotion to them is wearisome to the flesh.
13 The conclusion of the matter, everything having been heard, is: Fear the true God and keep his commandments, for this is the whole obligation of man.
14 For the true God will judge every deed, including every hidden thing, as to whether it is good or bad.
1 The song of songs, which is Solʹo·mon’s:
2 “May he kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, For your expressions of affection are better than wine.
3 The fragrance of your oils is pleasant. Your name is like a fragrant oil poured out. That is why the young women love you.
4 Take me with you; let us run. The king has brought me into his interior rooms! Let us be joyful and rejoice in you. Let us praise your expressions of affection more than wine. Rightly they love you.
5 I am dark, but lovely, O daughters of Jerusalem, Like the tents of Keʹdar, like the tent cloths of Solʹo·mon.
6 Do not stare at me because I am swarthy, Because the sun has gazed upon me. The sons of my mother were angry with me; They appointed me the keeper of the vineyards, But my own vineyard I did not keep.
7 Tell me, you whom I love so much, Where you pasture your flock, Where you have them lie down at midday. Why should I be like a woman wrapped in a veil Among the flocks of your companions?”
8 “If you do not know, O most beautiful of women, Go follow the tracks of the flock And pasture your young goats next to the tents of the shepherds.”
9 “I liken you, my beloved, to a mare among the chariots of Pharʹaoh.
10 Your cheeks are lovely with ornaments, Your neck with strings of beads.
11 We will make for you gold ornaments Studded with silver.”
12 “While the king sits at his round table, My perfume gives off its fragrance.
13 My dear one is to me like a fragrant bag of myrrh Spending the night between my breasts.
14 My dear one is to me like a cluster of henna Among the vineyards of En-gedʹi.”
15 “Look! You are beautiful, my beloved. Look! You are beautiful. Your eyes are those of doves.”
16 “Look! You are beautiful, my dear one, and delightful. Our bed is among the foliage.
17 The beams of our house are cedars, Our rafters are juniper trees.
2 “I am but a saffron of the coastal plain, A lily of the valleys.”
2 “Like a lily among thorns Is my beloved among the daughters.”
3 “Like an apple tree among the trees of the forest, So is my dear one among the sons. I passionately desire to sit in his shade, And his fruit is sweet to my taste.
4 He brought me into the banquet house, And his banner over me was love.
5 Refresh me with raisin cakes; Sustain me with apples, For I am lovesick.
6 His left hand is under my head, And his right hand embraces me.
7 I put you under oath, O daughters of Jerusalem, By the gazelles and the does of the field: Do not try to awaken or arouse love in me until it feels inclined.
8 The sound of my dear one! Look! Here he comes, Climbing the mountains, leaping over the hills.
9 My dear one is like a gazelle, like a young stag. There he is, standing behind our wall, Gazing through the windows, Looking through the lattices.
10 My dear one speaks, he says to me: ‘Rise up, my beloved, My beautiful one, come away with me.
11 Look! The winter has passed. The rains are over and gone.
12 Blossoms have appeared in the land, The time of pruning has arrived, And the song of the turtledove is heard in our land.
13 The fig tree ripens its early figs; The vines are in blossom and give off their fragrance. Rise up, my beloved, and come. My beautiful one, come away with me.
14 O my dove, in the retreats of the crag, In the recesses of the cliff, Let me see you and hear your voice, For your voice is pleasant and your appearance is lovely.’”
15 “Catch the foxes for us, The little foxes that ruin the vineyards, For our vineyards are in bloom.”
16 “My dear one is mine and I am his. He is shepherding among the lilies.
17 Until the day grows breezy and the shadows flee, Return quickly, O my dear one, Like the gazelle or the young stag upon the mountains of separation.
4 “Look! You are beautiful, my beloved. Look! You are beautiful. Your eyes are those of doves behind your veil. Your hair is like a flock of goats Streaming down the mountains of Gilʹe·ad.
2 Your teeth are like a flock of newly shorn sheep That have come up from being washed, All of them bearing twins, And not one has lost her young.
3 Your lips are like a scarlet thread, And your speech is delightful. Like a segment of pomegranate Are your cheeks behind your veil.
4 Your neck is like the tower of David, Built with courses of stone Upon which are hung a thousand shields, All the circular shields of the mighty men.
5 Your two breasts are like two fawns, The twins of a gazelle, That feed among the lilies.”
6 “Until the day grows breezy and the shadows flee, I will go my way to the mountain of myrrh And to the hill of frankincense.”
7 “You are altogether beautiful, my beloved, There is no blemish in you.
8 Come with me from Lebʹa·non, my bride, Come with me from Lebʹa·non. Descend from the peak of A·maʹnah, From the peak of Seʹnir, the peak of Herʹmon, From the lairs of lions, from the mountains of leopards.
9 You have captured my heart, my sister, my bride, You have captured my heart with one glance of your eyes, With one pendant of your necklace.
10 How beautiful your expressions of affection are, my sister, my bride! Your expressions of affection are far better than wine, And the fragrance of your perfume than any spice!
11 Your lips, my bride, drip with comb honey. Honey and milk are under your tongue, And the fragrance of your garments is like the fragrance of Lebʹa·non.
12 My sister, my bride, is like a locked garden, A locked garden, a spring sealed shut.
13 Your shoots are a paradise of pomegranates With the choicest fruits, with henna along with spikenard plants,
14 Spikenard and saffron, cane and cinnamon, With all sorts of trees of frankincense, myrrh, and aloes, Along with all the finest perfumes.
15 You are a garden spring, a well of fresh water, And flowing streams from Lebʹa·non.
16 Awake, O north wind; Come in, O south wind. Breathe upon my garden. Let its fragrance spread.” “Let my dear one come into his garden And eat its choicest fruits.”
5 “I have entered my garden, O my sister, my bride. I have picked my myrrh and my spice. I have eaten my honeycomb and my honey; I have drunk my wine and my milk.” “Eat, dear friends! Drink and become intoxicated with expressions of affection!”
2 “I am asleep, but my heart is awake. There is the sound of my dear one knocking!” “Open to me, O my sister, my beloved, My dove, my flawless one! For my head is wet with dew, The locks of my hair with the moisture of the night.”
3 “‘I have taken off my robe. Must I put it back on? I have washed my feet. Must I soil them again?’
4 My dear one withdrew his hand from the hole of the door, And my feelings for him were stirred.
5 I got up to open to my dear one; My hands dripped with myrrh, And my fingers with liquid myrrh, Onto the handles of the lock.
6 I opened to my dear one, But my dear one had turned away, he had gone. I felt despair when he departed. I sought him, but I did not find him. I called him, but he did not answer me.
7 The watchmen making their rounds in the city found me. They struck me, they wounded me. The watchmen of the walls took my shawl away from me.
8 I put you under oath, O daughters of Jerusalem: If you find my dear one, Tell him that I am lovesick.”
9 “How is your dear one better than any other dear one, You most beautiful of women? How is your dear one better than any other dear one, That you put us under such an oath?”
10 “My dear one is dazzling and ruddy; He stands out among ten thousand.
11 His head is gold, the finest gold. The locks of his hair are like waving palm fronds, As black as the raven.
12 His eyes are like doves by streams of water, Bathing themselves in milk, Sitting by a brimming pool.
13 His cheeks are like a bed of spices, Mounds of scented herbs. His lips are lilies, dripping with liquid myrrh.
14 His hands are cylinders of gold, set with chrysʹo·lite. His abdomen is polished ivory covered with sapphires.
15 His legs are pillars of marble set on pedestals of the finest gold. His appearance is like Lebʹa·non, as unrivaled as the cedars.
16 His mouth is sweetness itself, And everything about him is desirable. This is my dear one, this is my beloved, O daughters of Jerusalem.”
7 “How beautiful your feet are in your sandals, O noble daughter! The curves of your thighs are like ornaments, The work of an artisan’s hands.
2 Your navel is a round bowl. May it never lack mixed wine. Your belly is a heap of wheat, Encircled by lilies.
3 Your two breasts are like two fawns, The twins of a gazelle.
4 Your neck is like an ivory tower. Your eyes are like the pools in Heshʹbon, By the gate of Bath-rabʹbim. Your nose is like the tower of Lebʹa·non, Which looks toward Damascus.
5 Your head crowns you like Carʹmel, And the locks of your hair are like purple wool. The king is captivated by the flowing tresses.
6 How beautiful you are, and how pleasant you are, O beloved girl, above all exquisite delights!
7 Your stature is like a palm tree, And your breasts are like date clusters.
8 I said, ‘I will climb the palm tree To take hold of its stalks of fruit.’ May your breasts be like clusters of grapes, Your breath as fragrant as apples,
9 And your mouth like the best wine.” “May it go down smoothly for my dear one, Softly flowing over the lips of those asleep.
10 I am my dear one’s, And his desire is for me.
11 Come, O my dear one, Let us go out to the fields; Let us lodge among the henna plants.
12 Let us rise early and go to the vineyards To see if the vine has sprouted, If the blossoms have opened, If the pomegranates are in bloom. There I will express my affection for you.
13 The mandrakes give off their fragrance; At our doors are all sorts of choice fruits. The new as well as the old, O my dear one, I have kept in store for you.
1 The vision that Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem in the days of Uz·ziʹah, Joʹtham, Aʹhaz, and Hez·e·kiʹah, kings of Judah:
2 Hear, O heavens, and pay attention, O earth, For Jehovah has spoken: “Sons I have brought up and raised, But they have revolted against me.
3 A bull well knows its buyer, And a donkey the manger of its owner; But Israel does not know me, My own people do not behave with understanding.”
4 Woe to the sinful nation, The people weighed down with error, A brood of wicked men, corrupt children! They have abandoned Jehovah; They have treated the Holy One of Israel with disrespect; They have turned their backs on him.
5 Where will you be struck next as you add to your rebellion? The whole head is sick, And the whole heart is diseased.
6 From the sole of the foot to the head, nothing is healthy. There are wounds and bruises and open sores —They have not been treated or bound up or softened with oil.
7 Your land is desolate. Your cities are burned with fire. Foreigners devour your land right in front of you. It is like a wasteland overthrown by foreigners.
8 The daughter of Zion has been left like a shelter in a vineyard, Like a hut in a cucumber field, Like a city under siege.
9 Unless Jehovah of armies had left us a few survivors, We should have become just like Sodʹom, And we should have resembled Go·morʹrah.
10 Hear the word of Jehovah, you dictators of Sodʹom. Pay attention to the law of our God, you people of Go·morʹrah.
11 “Of what benefit to me are your many sacrifices?” says Jehovah. “I have had enough of your burnt offerings of rams and the fat of well-fed animals, And I have no delight in the blood of young bulls and lambs and goats.
12 When you come to appear before me, Who has required this from you, This trampling of my courtyards?
13 Stop bringing in any more worthless grain offerings. Your incense is detestable to me. New moons, sabbaths, the calling of conventions —I cannot put up with the use of magical power along with your solemn assembly.
14 I have hated your new moons and your festivals. They have become a burden to me; I am tired of bearing them.
15 And when you spread out your palms, I hide my eyes from you. Although you offer many prayers, I am not listening; Your hands are filled with blood.
16 Wash yourselves, make yourselves clean; Remove your evil deeds from my sight; Stop doing bad.
17 Learn to do good, seek justice, Correct the oppressor, Defend the rights of the fatherless child, And plead the cause of the widow.”
18 “Come, now, and let us set matters straight between us,” says Jehovah. “Though your sins are like scarlet, They will be made as white as snow; Though they are as red as crimson cloth, They will become like wool.
19 If you show willingness and listen, You will eat the good things of the land.
20 But if you refuse and rebel, You will be devoured by the sword, For the mouth of Jehovah has spoken it.”
21 How the faithful city has become a prostitute! She was full of justice; Righteousness used to lodge in her, But now murderers.
22 Your silver has become dross, And your beer is diluted with water.
23 Your princes are stubborn and partners with thieves. Every one of them loves a bribe and chases after gifts. They do not grant justice to the fatherless, And the legal case of the widow never reaches them.
24 Therefore the true Lord, Jehovah of armies, The Powerful One of Israel, declares: “Ah! I will rid myself of my adversaries, And I will take revenge on my enemies.
25 I will turn my hand against you, I will smelt away your dross as with lye, And I will remove all your impurities.
26 I will restore your judges as in the beginning And your advisers as at the start. After this you will be called City of Righteousness, Faithful Town.
27 With justice Zion will be redeemed, And her people who return, with righteousness.
28 The rebels and the sinners will be broken together, And those leaving Jehovah will come to their finish.
29 For they will be ashamed of the mighty trees that you desired, And you will be disgraced because of the gardens that you chose.
30 For you will become like a big tree with withering leaves, And like a garden without water.
31 The strong man will become tow, And his work a spark; Both of them will go up in flames together, With no one to extinguish them.”
2 This is what Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem:
2 In the final part of the days, The mountain of the house of Jehovah Will become firmly established above the top of the mountains, And it will be raised up above the hills, And to it all the nations will stream.
3 And many peoples will go and say: “Come, let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, To the house of the God of Jacob. He will instruct us about his ways, And we will walk in his paths.” For law will go out of Zion, And the word of Jehovah out of Jerusalem.
4 He will render judgment among the nations And set matters straight respecting many peoples. They will beat their swords into plowshares And their spears into pruning shears. Nation will not lift up sword against nation, Nor will they learn war anymore.
5 O house of Jacob, come, Let us walk in the light of Jehovah.
6 For you have forsaken your people, the house of Jacob, Because they have become full of things from the East; They practice magic like the Phi·lisʹtines, And they abound with the children of foreigners.
7 Their land is filled with silver and gold, And there is no limit to their treasures. Their land is filled with horses, And there is no limit to their chariots.
8 Their land is filled with worthless gods. They bow down to the work of their own hands, To what their own fingers have made.
9 So man bows down, he becomes low, And you cannot possibly pardon them.
10 Enter into the rock and hide yourself in the dust Because of the terrifying presence of Jehovah And his majestic splendor.
11 The haughty eyes of man will be brought low, And the arrogance of men will bow down. Jehovah alone will be exalted in that day.
12 For it is the day belonging to Jehovah of armies. It is coming upon everyone who is haughty and lofty, Upon everyone, whether exalted or lowly,
13 Upon all the cedars of Lebʹa·non that are lofty and exalted And upon all the oaks of Baʹshan,
14 Upon all the lofty mountains And upon all the high hills,
15 Upon every high tower and every fortified wall,
16 Upon all the ships of Tarʹshish And upon all desirable boats.
17 Man’s haughtiness will be brought down, And the arrogance of men will bow low. Jehovah alone will be exalted in that day.
18 The worthless gods will completely disappear.
19 And people will enter into the caves of the rocks And into the holes in the ground, Because of the terrifying presence of Jehovah And his majestic splendor, When he arises to make the earth tremble in terror.
20 In that day men will take their worthless gods of silver and of gold That they had made for themselves to bow down to And throw them away to the shrewmice and to the bats,
21 In order to enter into the holes in the rocks And into the clefts of the crags, Because of the terrifying presence of Jehovah And his majestic splendor, When he arises to make the earth tremble in terror.
22 For your own sakes, quit trusting in mere man, Who is only the breath in his nostrils. Why should he be taken into account?
4 And seven women will grab hold of one man in that day, saying: “We will eat our own bread And wear our own clothing; Only let us be called by your name To take away our disgrace.”
2 In that day what Jehovah makes sprout will be splendid and glorious, and the fruitage of the land will be the pride and beauty of the survivors of Israel.
3 Whoever remains in Zion and is left over in Jerusalem will be called holy, all of those in Jerusalem written down for life.
4 When Jehovah washes away the filth of the daughters of Zion and rinses away the bloodshed of Jerusalem from her midst by the spirit of judgment and by a spirit of burning,
5 Jehovah will also create over the whole site of Mount Zion and over the place of her conventions a cloud and smoke by day and a bright flaming fire by night; for over all the glory there will be a shelter.
6 And there will be a booth for shade by day from the heat, and for refuge and protection from storms and the rain.
5 Let me sing, please, to my beloved A song about my loved one and his vineyard. My beloved had a vineyard on a fruitful hillside.
2 He dug it up and rid it of stones. He planted it with a choice red vine, Built a tower in the middle of it, And hewed out a winepress in it. Then he kept hoping for it to produce grapes, But it produced only wild grapes.
3 “And now, you inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah, Please judge between me and my vineyard.
4 What more could I have done for my vineyard That I have not already done? Why, when I hoped for grapes, Did it produce only wild grapes?
5 Now, please, let me tell you What I will do to my vineyard: I will remove its hedge, And it will be burned down. I will break down its stone wall, And it will be trampled on.
6 I will make it a wasteland; It will not be pruned or hoed. It will be overgrown with thornbushes and weeds, And I will command the clouds not to send any rain on it.
7 For the vineyard of Jehovah of armies is the house of Israel; The men of Judah are the plantation he was fond of. He kept hoping for justice, But look! there was injustice; For righteousness, But look! a cry of distress.”
8 Woe to those who join one house to another house And who annex one field to another field Until there is no more room And you live by yourselves on the land!
9 Jehovah of armies has sworn in my ears That many houses, though great and beautiful, Will become an object of horror, Without an inhabitant.
10 For ten acres of vineyard will produce but one bath measure, And a hoʹmer measure of seed will produce only an eʹphah.
11 Woe to those who get up early in the morning to drink alcohol, Who linger late into the evening darkness until wine inflames them!
12 They have harp and stringed instrument, Tambourine, flute, and wine at their feasts; But they do not consider the activity of Jehovah, And they do not see the work of his hands.
13 So my people will go into exile For lack of knowledge; Their glorious men will go hungry, And all their people will be parched with thirst.
14 So the Grave has enlarged itself And has opened its mouth wide without limit; And her splendor, her noisy multitudes, and her revelers Will certainly go down into it.
15 And man will bow down, Man will be brought low, And the eyes of the haughty will be brought low.
16 Jehovah of armies will be exalted by his judgment; The true God, the Holy One, will sanctify himself through righteousness.
17 And the lambs will graze as in their pasture; Foreign residents will feed on the desolate places of well-fed animals.
18 Woe to those who drag along their guilt with ropes of deception And their sin with wagon cords;
19 Those who say: “Let Him speed up his work; Let it come quickly that we may see it. Let the purpose of the Holy One of Israel take place That we may know it!”
20 Woe to those who say that good is bad and bad is good, Those who substitute darkness for light and light for darkness, Those who put bitter for sweet and sweet for bitter!
21 Woe to those wise in their own eyes And discreet in their own sight!
22 Woe to those who are mighty in drinking wine And to the men who are masters at mixing alcoholic drinks,
23 Those who acquit the wicked for a bribe And who deny justice to the righteous!
24 Therefore, just as the tongue of fire consumes the stubble And dry grass shrivels in the flames, Their very roots will rot, And their blossoms will scatter like powder, Because they rejected the law of Jehovah of armies And disrespected the word of the Holy One of Israel.
25 That is why the anger of Jehovah burns against his people, And he will stretch out his hand against them and strike them. The mountains will quake, And their corpses will be like refuse in the streets. In view of all this, his anger has not turned back, But his hand is still stretched out to strike.
26 He has raised up a signal to a distant nation; He has whistled for them to come from the ends of the earth; And look! they are coming very swiftly.
27 None among them are tired or stumbling. No one is drowsy or sleeps. The belt around their waist is not loosened, Nor are their sandal laces broken.
28 All their arrows are sharp, And all their bows are bent. The hooves of their horses are like flint, And their wheels like a storm wind.
29 Their roaring is like that of a lion; They roar like young lions. They will growl and seize the prey And carry it off with no one to rescue it.
30 In that day they will growl over it Like the growling of the sea. Anyone who gazes at the land will see distressing darkness; Even the light has grown dark because of the clouds.
6 In the year that King Uz·ziʹah died, I saw Jehovah sitting on a lofty and elevated throne, and the skirts of his robe filled the temple.
2 Seraphs were standing above him; each had six wings. Each covered his face with two and covered his feet with two, and each of them would fly about with two.
3 And one called to the other: “Holy, holy, holy is Jehovah of armies. The whole earth is filled with his glory.”
4 And the pivots of the thresholds quivered at the sound of the shouting, and the house was filled with smoke.
5 Then I said: “Woe to me! I am as good as dead, For I am a man of unclean lips, And I live among a people of unclean lips; For my eyes have seen the King, Jehovah of armies himself!”
6 At that, one of the seraphs flew to me, and in his hand was a glowing coal that he had taken with tongs from the altar.
7 He touched my mouth and said: “Look! This has touched your lips. Your guilt is removed, And your sin is atoned for.”
8 Then I heard the voice of Jehovah saying: “Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?” And I said: “Here I am! Send me!”
9 And he replied, “Go, and say to this people: ‘You will hear again and again, But you will not understand; You will see again and again, But you will not get any knowledge.’
10 Make the heart of this people unreceptive, Make their ears unresponsive, And paste their eyes together, So that they may not see with their eyes And hear with their ears, So that their heart may not understand And they may not turn back and be healed.”
11 At this I said: “How long, O Jehovah?” Then he said: “Until the cities crash in ruins without an inhabitant And the houses are without people And the land is ruined and desolate;
12 Until Jehovah removes men far away And the deserted condition of the land becomes very extensive.
13 “But there will still be a tenth in it, and it will again be burned, like a big tree and like an oak, which after they are cut down leave a stump; a holy seed will be its stump.”
8 Jehovah said to me: “Take a large tablet and write on it with an ordinary stylus, ‘Maʹher-shalʹal-hash-baz.’
2 And let me have it confirmed in writing by faithful witnesses, U·riʹah the priest and Zech·a·riʹah the son of Je·ber·e·chiʹah.”
3 Then I had relations with the prophetess, and she became pregnant and in time gave birth to a son. Jehovah then said to me: “Name him Maʹher-shalʹal-hash-baz,
4 for before the boy knows how to call out, ‘My father!’ and ‘My mother!’ the resources of Damascus and the spoil of Sa·marʹi·a will be carried away before the king of As·syrʹi·a.”
5 Jehovah spoke to me again:
6 “Because this people has rejected the gently flowing waters of the Shi·loʹah And they rejoice over Reʹzin and the son of Rem·a·liʹah,
7 Therefore look! Jehovah will bring against them The mighty and vast waters of the River, The king of As·syrʹi·a and all his glory. He will come up over all his streambeds And overflow all his banks
8 And sweep through Judah. He will flood and pass through, reaching to the neck; His outspread wings will fill the breadth of your land, O Im·manʹu·el!”
9 Cause harm, you peoples, but you will be shattered to pieces. Listen, all you from distant parts of the earth! Prepare for battle, but you will be shattered to pieces! Prepare for battle, but you will be shattered to pieces!
10 Devise a plan, but it will be thwarted! Say what you like, but it will not succeed, For God is with us!
11 With his strong hand on me, this is what Jehovah said to me to warn me away from following the course of this people:
12 “You should not call a conspiracy what this people calls a conspiracy! Do not fear what they fear; Do not tremble at it.
13 Jehovah of armies—he is the One you should regard as holy, He is the One you should fear, And he is the One who should cause you to tremble.”
14 He will become as a sanctuary, But as a stone to strike against And as a rock to stumble over To both houses of Israel, As a trap and a snare To the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
15 Many of them will stumble and fall and be broken; They will be ensnared and caught.
16 Wrap up the written confirmation; Seal up the law among my disciples!
17 I will keep in expectation of Jehovah, who is hiding his face from the house of Jacob, and I will hope in him.
18 Look! I and the children whom Jehovah has given me are as signs and as miracles in Israel from Jehovah of armies, who resides on Mount Zion.
19 And if they say to you: “Inquire of the spirit mediums or of the fortune-tellers who chirp and mutter,” is it not of their God that a people should inquire? Should they inquire of the dead in behalf of the living?
20 Instead, they should inquire of the law and of the written confirmation! When they do not speak according to this word, they have no light.
21 And each one will pass through the land afflicted and hungry; and because he is hungry and indignant, he will curse his king and his God as he looks upward.
22 Then he will look to the earth and see only distress and darkness, obscurity and hard times, gloom and no brightness.
9 However, the gloom will not be as when the land had distress, as in former times when the land of Zebʹu·lun and the land of Naphʹta·li were treated with contempt. But at a later time He will cause it to be honored—the way by the sea, in the region of the Jordan, Galʹi·lee of the nations.
2 The people who were walking in the darkness Have seen a great light. As for those dwelling in the land of deep shadow, Light has shone on them.
3 You have made the nation populous; You have made its rejoicing great. They rejoice before you As people rejoice in the harvesttime, As those who joyfully divide up the spoil.
4 For you have shattered to pieces the yoke of their load, The rod on their shoulders, the staff of the taskmaster, As in the day of Midʹi·an.
5 Every boot that shakes the earth as it marches And every garment soaked in blood Will become fuel for the fire.
6 For a child has been born to us, A son has been given to us; And the rulership will rest on his shoulder. His name will be called Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Eternal Father, Prince of Peace.
7 To the increase of his rulership And to peace, there will be no end, On the throne of David and on his kingdom In order to establish it firmly and to sustain it Through justice and righteousness, From now on and forever. The zeal of Jehovah of armies will do this.
8 Jehovah sent a word against Jacob, And it has come against Israel.
9 And all the people will know it —Eʹphra·im and the inhabitants of Sa·marʹi·a— Who say in their haughtiness and in their insolence of heart:
10 “Bricks have fallen, But we will build with hewn stone. Sycamore trees have been cut down, But we will replace them with cedars.”
11 Jehovah will raise up Reʹzin’s adversaries against him And will stir his enemies to action,
12 Syria from the east and the Phi·lisʹtines from the west, They will devour Israel with open mouths. In view of all this, his anger has not turned back, But his hand is still stretched out to strike.
13 For the people have not returned to the One who strikes them; They have not sought Jehovah of armies.
14 Jehovah will cut off from Israel Head and tail, shoot and rush, in one day.
15 The elder and highly respected one is the head, And the prophet giving false instruction is the tail.
16 Those leading this people are causing them to wander, And those who are being led are confused.
17 That is why Jehovah will not rejoice over their young men, And he will have no mercy on their fatherless children and their widows Because all of them are apostates and evildoers And every mouth is speaking senselessness. In view of all this, his anger has not turned back, But his hand is still stretched out to strike.
18 For wickedness burns like a fire, Consuming thornbushes and weeds. It will set fire to the thickets of the forest, And they will go up in clouds of smoke.
19 In the fury of Jehovah of armies The land has been set on fire, And the people will become fuel for the fire. No one will spare even his brother.
20 One will cut down on the right But still be hungry; And one will eat on the left But will not be satisfied. Each will devour the flesh of his own arm,
21 Ma·nasʹseh will devour Eʹphra·im, And Eʹphra·im Ma·nasʹseh. Together they will be against Judah. In view of all this, his anger has not turned back, But his hand is still stretched out to strike.
10 Woe to those who enact harmful regulations, Who constantly draft oppressive decrees,
2 To deny the legal claim of the poor, To deprive the lowly among my people of justice, Making widows their spoil And fatherless children their plunder!
3 What will you do on the day of reckoning, When destruction comes from afar? To whom will you flee for assistance, And where will you leave your wealth?
4 Nothing remains except to crouch among the prisoners Or to fall among the slain. In view of all this, his anger has not turned back, But his hand is still stretched out to strike.
5 “Aha! the As·syrʹi·an, The rod to express my anger And the staff in their hand for my denunciation!
6 I will send him against an apostate nation, Against the people who infuriated me; I will command him to take much spoil and much plunder And to trample them like mud in the streets.
7 But he will not be inclined this way And his heart will not scheme this way; For it is in his heart to annihilate, To cut off many nations, not a few.
8 For he says, ‘Are not my princes all kings?
9 Is not Calʹno just like Carʹche·mish? Is not Haʹmath like Arʹpad? Is not Sa·marʹi·a like Damascus?
10 My hand has seized the kingdoms of the worthless gods, Whose graven images were more than those of Jerusalem and Sa·marʹi·a!
11 Will I not also do to Jerusalem and her idols Just as I have done to Sa·marʹi·a and to her worthless gods?’
12 “When Jehovah finishes all his work on Mount Zion and in Jerusalem, He will punish the king of As·syrʹi·a for his insolent heart and his proud, arrogant gaze.
13 For he says, ‘I will do this by the strength of my hand And with my wisdom, for I am wise. I will remove the boundaries of peoples And pillage their treasures, And I will subdue the inhabitants like a mighty one.
14 Like a man reaching into a nest, My hand will seize the resources of the peoples; And like one gathering abandoned eggs, I will gather the whole earth! No one will flutter his wings or open his mouth or chirp.’”
15 Will the ax exalt itself over the one who chops with it? Will the saw exalt itself over the one who saws with it? Could a staff wave the one who lifts it? Or could a rod lift up the one who is not made of wood?
16 Therefore the true Lord, Jehovah of armies, Will inflict emaciation on his fat ones, And beneath his glory he will kindle a blazing fire.
17 Israel’s Light will become a fire, And his Holy One a flame; It will blaze up and consume his weeds and his thornbushes in one day.
18 He will utterly do away with the glory of his forest and his orchard; It will be as when a sick man wastes away.
19 The rest of the trees of his forest Will be so few that a boy could list them.
20 In that day those remaining of Israel And the survivors of the house of Jacob Will no longer support themselves on the one who struck them; But they will support themselves on Jehovah, The Holy One of Israel, with faithfulness.
21 Only a remnant will return, The remnant of Jacob, to the Mighty God.
22 For though your people, O Israel, Are as the grains of sand of the sea, Only a remnant of them will return. An extermination has been decided on, And justice will engulf them.
23 Yes, the extermination decided on by the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, Will be carried out in the entire land.
24 Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, says: “Do not be afraid, my people who are dwelling in Zion, because of the As·syrʹi·an, who used to strike you with the rod and to lift up his staff against you as Egypt did.
25 For in a very little while the denunciation will come to an end; my anger will be directed to their destruction.
26 Jehovah of armies will brandish a whip against him, as when he defeated Midʹi·an by the rock Oʹreb. And his staff will be over the sea, and he will raise it as he did with Egypt.
27 In that day his load will depart from on your shoulder, And his yoke from on your neck, And the yoke will be broken because of the oil.”
28 He has come to Aiʹath; He has passed through Migʹron; At Michʹmash he deposits his baggage.
29 They have passed over the ford; They spend the night at Geʹba; Raʹmah trembles, Gibʹe·ah of Saul has fled.
30 Cry out and scream, O daughter of Galʹlim! Pay attention, O Laʹi·shah! O poor Anʹa·thoth!
31 Mad·meʹnah has run away. The inhabitants of Geʹbim have sought shelter.
32 This very day he will halt in Nob. He shakes his fist at the mountain of the daughter of Zion, The hill of Jerusalem.
33 Look! The true Lord, Jehovah of armies, Is chopping off branches with a terrible crash; The tallest trees are being cut down, And the lofty are brought low.
34 He strikes down the thickets of the forest with an iron tool, And Lebʹa·non will fall by a mighty one.
11 A twig will grow out of the stump of Jesʹse, And a sprout from his roots will bear fruit.
2 And the spirit of Jehovah will settle upon him, The spirit of wisdom and of understanding, The spirit of counsel and of mightiness, The spirit of knowledge and of the fear of Jehovah.
3 And he will find delight in the fear of Jehovah. He will not judge by what appears to his eyes, Nor reprove simply according to what his ears hear.
4 He will judge the lowly with fairness, And with uprightness he will give reproof in behalf of the meek ones of the earth. He will strike the earth with the rod of his mouth And put the wicked to death with the breath of his lips.
5 Righteousness will be the belt around his waist, And faithfulness the belt of his hips.
6 The wolf will reside for a while with the lamb, And with the young goat the leopard will lie down, And the calf and the lion and the fattened animal will all be together; And a little boy will lead them.
7 The cow and the bear will feed together, And their young will lie down together. The lion will eat straw like the bull.
8 The nursing child will play over the lair of a cobra, And a weaned child will put his hand over the den of a poisonous snake.
9 They will not cause any harm Or any ruin in all my holy mountain, Because the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah As the waters cover the sea.
10 In that day the root of Jesʹse will stand up as a signal for the peoples. To him the nations will turn for guidance, And his resting-place will become glorious.
11 In that day Jehovah will again offer his hand, a second time, to reclaim the remnant of his people who are left from As·syrʹi·a, from Egypt, from Pathʹros, from Cush, from Eʹlam, from Shiʹnar, from Haʹmath, and from the islands of the sea.
12 He will raise up a signal for the nations and gather the dispersed ones of Israel, and he will gather together the scattered ones of Judah from the four corners of the earth.
13 The jealousy of Eʹphra·im will be gone, And those who show hostility to Judah will be done away with. Eʹphra·im will not be jealous of Judah, Nor will Judah show hostility toward Eʹphra·im.
14 And they will swoop down on the slopes of the Phi·lisʹtines to the west; Together they will plunder the people of the East. They will thrust out their hand against Eʹdom and Moʹab, And the Amʹmon·ites will become their subjects.
15 Jehovah will divide the gulf of the Egyptian sea And wave his hand over the River. With his scorching breath he will strike it in its seven torrents, And he will cause people to walk across in their sandals.
16 And there will be a highway out of As·syrʹi·a for the remnant of his people who are left, As there was for Israel in the day he came out of the land of Egypt.
12 In that day you will certainly say: “I thank you, O Jehovah, For although you were angry with me, Your anger gradually subsided, and you comforted me.
2 Look! God is my salvation. I will trust and feel no dread; For Jah Jehovah is my strength and my might, And he has become my salvation.”
3 With rejoicing you will draw water From the springs of salvation.
4 And in that day you will say: “Give thanks to Jehovah, call on his name, Make his deeds known among the peoples! Declare that his name is exalted.
5 Sing praises to Jehovah, for he has done magnificent things. Let this be made known in all the earth.
6 Cry out and shout for joy, you inhabitant of Zion, For great in your midst is the Holy One of Israel.”
13 A pronouncement against Babylon that Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz saw in vision:
2 “Raise up a signal on a mountain of bare rocks. Call out to them, wave your hand, So that they may come into the entrances of the nobles.
3 I have issued the command to those whom I have appointed. I have summoned my warriors to express my anger, My proudly exultant ones.
4 Listen! A crowd in the mountains; It sounds like a numerous people! Listen! The uproar of kingdoms, Of nations gathered together! Jehovah of armies is mustering the army for war.
5 They are coming from a distant land, From the extremity of the heavens, Jehovah and the weapons of his wrath, To bring ruin to all the earth.
6 Wail, for the day of Jehovah is near! It will come as a destruction from the Almighty.
7 That is why all hands will go limp, And every man’s heart will melt with fear.
8 The people are panic-stricken. They are seized with convulsions and pain, Like a woman in labor. They look at one another in horror, With faces inflamed by anguish.
9 Look! The day of Jehovah is coming, Cruel both with fury and with burning anger, To make the land an object of horror, And to annihilate the land’s sinners from it.
10 For the stars of the heavens and their constellations Will not give off their light; The sun will be dark when it rises, And the moon will not shed its light.
11 I will call the inhabited earth to account for its badness, And the wicked for their error. I will put an end to the pride of the presumptuous, And I will humble the haughtiness of tyrants.
12 I will make mortal man scarcer than refined gold, And humans scarcer than the gold of Oʹphir.
13 That is why I will make the heavens tremble, And the earth will be shaken out of its place At the fury of Jehovah of armies in the day of his burning anger.
14 Like a hunted gazelle and like a flock with no one to gather them, Each will return to his own people; Each will flee to his own land.
15 Whoever is found will be pierced through, And whoever is caught will fall by the sword.
16 Their children will be dashed to pieces before their eyes, Their houses will be looted, And their wives will be raped.
17 Here I am raising up against them the Medes, Who regard silver as nothing And who take no delight in gold.
18 Their bows will shatter young men; They will show no pity on the fruit of the womb Nor mercy to children.
19 And Babylon, the most glorious of kingdoms, The beauty and the pride of the Chal·deʹans, Will be like Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah when God overthrew them.
20 She will never be inhabited, Nor will she be a place to reside in throughout all generations. No Arab will pitch his tent there, And no shepherds will rest their flocks there.
21 The desert creatures will lie down there; Their houses will be filled with eagle owls. The ostriches will reside there, And wild goats will skip about there.
22 Howling creatures will cry out in her towers, And jackals in her luxurious palaces. Her time is near, and her days will not be prolonged.”
14 For Jehovah will show mercy to Jacob, and he will again choose Israel. He will settle them in their land, and the foreign residents will join them and attach themselves to the house of Jacob.
2 And peoples will take them and bring them to their own place, and the house of Israel will possess them as male and female servants in Jehovah’s land; and they will be the captors of those who held them captive, and they will have in subjection those who were forcing them to work.
3 In the day when Jehovah gives you rest from your pain and from your turmoil and from the hard slavery imposed on you,
4 you will recite this proverb against the king of Babylon: “How the one forcing others to work has met his end! How the oppression has ended!
5 Jehovah has broken the rod of the wicked, The staff of the rulers,
6 The one furiously striking peoples with unceasing blows, The one angrily subduing nations with relentless persecution.
7 The whole earth now rests, free of disturbance. People cry out for joy.
8 Even the juniper trees rejoice over you, Along with the cedars of Lebʹa·non. They say, ‘Ever since you have fallen, No woodcutter comes up against us.’
9 Even the Grave underneath is stirred up To meet you when you come. Because of you, it awakens those powerless in death, All the oppressive leaders of the earth. It makes all the kings of the nations rise from their thrones.
10 All of them speak up and say to you, ‘Have you also become weak like us? Have you become like us?
11 Down to the Grave your pride has been brought, The sound of your stringed instruments. Maggots are spread beneath you as a bed, And worms are your covering.’
12 How you have fallen from heaven, O shining one, son of the dawn! How you have been cut down to the earth, You who vanquished nations!
13 You said in your heart, ‘I will ascend to the heavens. Above the stars of God I will lift up my throne, And I will sit down on the mountain of meeting, In the remotest parts of the north.
14 I will go up above the tops of the clouds; I will make myself resemble the Most High.’
15 Instead, you will be brought down to the Grave, To the remotest parts of the pit.
16 Those seeing you will stare at you; They will closely examine you, saying, ‘Is this the man who was shaking the earth, Who made kingdoms tremble,
17 Who made the inhabited earth like the wilderness And overthrew its cities, Who refused to let his prisoners go home?’
18 All other kings of the nations, Yes, all of them, lie down in glory, Each one in his own tomb.
19 But you are discarded without a grave, Like a detested sprout, Clothed with the slain who were stabbed with the sword, Who go down to the stones of a pit, Like a carcass trampled underfoot.
20 You will not join them in a grave, For you destroyed your own land, You killed your own people. The offspring of evildoers will never again be named.
21 Prepare a slaughtering block for his sons Because of the guilt of their forefathers, So that they will not rise up and take over the earth And fill the land with their cities.”
22 “I will rise up against them,” declares Jehovah of armies. “And I will wipe out from Babylon name and remnant and descendants and posterity,” declares Jehovah.
23 “And I will make her a possession of porcupines and a region of marshes, and I will sweep her with the broom of annihilation,” declares Jehovah of armies.
24 Jehovah of armies has sworn: “Just as I have intended, so it will occur, And just as I have decided, that is what will come true.
25 I will crush the As·syrʹi·an in my land, And I will trample him on my mountains. His yoke will be removed from them, And his load will be removed from their shoulder.”
26 This is what has been decided against all the earth, And this is the hand that is stretched out against all the nations.
27 For Jehovah of armies has decided, And who can thwart it? His hand is stretched out, And who can turn it back?
28 In the year that King Aʹhaz died, this pronouncement was made:
29 “Do not rejoice, Phi·lisʹti·a, any of you, Just because the staff of the one striking you has been broken. For from the root of the serpent will come a poisonous snake, And its offspring will be a flying fiery snake.
30 While the firstborn of the lowly feed And the poor lie down in security, I will put your root to death with famine, And what is left of you will be killed.
31 Wail, O gate! Cry out, O city! All of you will lose heart, O Phi·lisʹti·a! For a smoke is coming from the north, And there are no stragglers in his ranks.”
32 How should they answer the messengers of the nation? That Jehovah has laid the foundation of Zion, And that the lowly ones of his people will take refuge in her.
15 A pronouncement against Moʹab: Because it has been devastated in a night, Ar of Moʹab has been silenced. Because it has been devastated in a night, Kir of Moʹab has been silenced.
2 He has gone up to the House and to Diʹbon, To the high places to weep. Moʹab wails over Neʹbo and over Medʹe·ba. Every head is shaved bald, every beard is clipped.
3 In its streets they have put on sackcloth. On their roofs and in their public squares they all wail; They go down weeping.
4 Heshʹbon and E·le·aʹleh cry out; Their voice is heard as far as Jaʹhaz. That is why the armed men of Moʹab keep shouting. He is trembling.
5 My heart cries out over Moʹab. Its fugitives have fled as far as Zoʹar and Egʹlath-she·liʹshi·yah. On the ascent of Luʹhith they weep as they go up; On the way to Hor·o·naʹim they cry out over the catastrophe.
6 For the waters of Nimʹrim are desolate; The green grass has dried up, The grass is gone and nothing green is left.
7 That is why they are carrying away what is left of their stores and their riches; They are crossing the valley of poplars.
8 For the outcry echoes throughout the territory of Moʹab. The wailing reaches to Eg·laʹim; The wailing reaches to Beʹer-eʹlim.
9 For the waters of Diʹmon are full of blood, And I have more in store for Diʹmon: A lion for those of Moʹab who escape And for those remaining in the land.
16 Send a ram to the ruler of the land, From Seʹla through the wilderness To the mountain of the daughter of Zion.
2 Like a bird chased away from its nest, So the daughters of Moʹab will be at the fords of Arʹnon.
3 “Offer counsel, carry out the decision. Make your shadow at high noon like the night. Conceal the dispersed and do not betray those fleeing.
4 May my dispersed ones reside in you, O Moʹab. Become a place of concealment to them because of the destroyer. The oppressor will reach his end, The destruction will come to an end, And those trampling others down will perish from the earth.
5 Then a throne will be firmly established in loyal love. The one who sits on it in the tent of David will be faithful; He will judge fairly and will swiftly execute righteousness.”
6 We have heard about the pride of Moʹab—he is very proud— His haughtiness and his pride and his fury; But his empty talk will come to nothing.
7 So Moʹab will wail for Moʹab; They will all wail. Those who are stricken will moan for the raisin cakes of Kir-harʹe·seth.
8 For the terraces of Heshʹbon have withered, The vine of Sibʹmah, The rulers of the nations have trampled its bright-red branches; They had reached as far as Jaʹzer; They had extended into the wilderness. Its shoots had spread out and gone as far as the sea.
9 That is why I will weep over the vine of Sibʹmah as I weep for Jaʹzer. With my tears I will drench you, O Heshʹbon and E·le·aʹleh, Because the shouting over your summer fruit and your harvest has ended.
10 Rejoicing and joyfulness have been taken away from the orchard, And there are no songs of joy or shouting in the vineyards. The treader no longer treads out wine in the presses, For I have caused the shouting to cease.
11 That is why deep within me I am boisterous over Moʹab, Like the strumming of a harp, And my innermost being over Kir-harʹe·seth.
12 Even when Moʹab wears himself out on the high place and goes to pray in his sanctuary, he will accomplish nothing.
13 This is the word that Jehovah previously spoke concerning Moʹab.
14 And now Jehovah says: “Within three years, like the years of a hired worker, the glory of Moʹab will be disgraced with much tumult of every sort, and those who remain will be very few and insignificant.”
17 A pronouncement against Damascus: “Look! Damascus will cease to be a city, And it will become a heap of ruins.
2 The cities of A·roʹer will be abandoned; They will become places for flocks to lie down With no one to make them afraid.
3 Fortified cities will disappear from Eʹphra·im, And the kingdom from Damascus; And those remaining of Syria Will be like the glory of the Israelites,” declares Jehovah of armies.
4 “In that day the glory of Jacob will diminish, And his healthy body will grow thin.
5 It will be as when the harvester is gathering the standing grain And his arm harvests the ears of grain, Like when one gleans grain in the Valley of Rephʹa·im.
6 Only gleanings will be left, As when an olive tree is beaten: Only two or three ripe olives remain on the highest branch, Only four or five on its fruit-bearing branches,” declares Jehovah the God of Israel.
7 In that day man will look up to his Maker, and his eyes will gaze at the Holy One of Israel.
8 He will not look to the altars, the work of his hands; and he will not gaze at what his fingers have made, either the sacred poles or the incense stands.
9 In that day his fortress cities will become like an abandoned site in the woodland, Like a branch that was abandoned before the Israelites; It will become a wasteland.
10 For you have forgotten the God of your salvation; You have failed to remember the Rock of your fortress. That is why you plant beautiful plantations And set it with the shoot of a stranger.
11 In the day you carefully fence in your plantation, In the morning you make your seed sprout, But the harvest will vanish in the day of disease and incurable pain.
12 Listen! There is a commotion of many peoples, Who are as boisterous as the seas! There is an uproar of nations, Whose sound is like the roar of mighty waters!
13 The nations will make a sound like the roar of many waters. He will rebuke them, and they will flee far away, Chased like the chaff of the mountains before a wind, Like a whirling thistle before a storm wind.
14 In the evening there is terror. Before morning they are no more. This is the share of those pillaging us And the lot of those plundering us.
18 Woe to the land of whirring insect wings In the region of the rivers of E·thi·oʹpi·a!
2 It sends envoys by sea, Across the waters in papyrus vessels, saying: “Go, you swift messengers, To a tall and smooth-skinned nation, To a people feared everywhere, To a strong, conquering nation, Whose land is washed away by rivers.”
3 All you inhabitants of the land and you residents of the earth, What you see will be like a signal raised on the mountains, And you will hear a sound like the blowing of a horn.
4 For this is what Jehovah said to me: “I will remain undisturbed and look on my established place, Like the shimmering heat along with the sunlight, Like the cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.
5 For before the harvest, When the blossom is finished and the bloom becomes a ripening grape, The shoots will be cut off with pruning shears And the tendrils will be lopped off and removed.
6 They will all be left for the birds of prey of the mountains And for the beasts of the earth. The birds of prey will spend the summer on them, And all the beasts of the earth will spend the harvesttime on them.
7 At that time a gift will be brought to Jehovah of armies, From a tall and smooth-skinned nation, From a people feared everywhere, From a strong, conquering nation, Whose land is washed away by rivers To the place that bears the name of Jehovah of armies, Mount Zion.”
19 A pronouncement against Egypt: Look! Jehovah is riding on a swift cloud and is coming into Egypt. The worthless gods of Egypt will tremble before him, And the heart of Egypt will melt within it.
2 “I will incite Egyptians against Egyptians, And they will fight one another, Each against his brother and his neighbor, City against city, kingdom against kingdom.
3 And the spirit of Egypt will become bewildered within it, And I will confuse its plans. They will resort to the worthless gods, To the charmers and to the spirit mediums and to the fortune-tellers.
4 I will hand Egypt over to a hard master, And a harsh king will rule over them,” declares the true Lord, Jehovah of armies.
5 The water of the sea will be dried up, And the river will become parched and run dry.
6 And the rivers will stink; The Nile canals of Egypt will become low and parched. The reeds and the rushes will decay.
7 The plants along the Nile River, at the mouth of the Nile, And all the land sown with seed along the Nile will dry up. It will be blown away, and it will be no more.
8 And the fishermen will mourn, Those casting fishhooks into the Nile will lament, And those who spread their nets on the water will dwindle.
9 Those who work in combed flax And those making white fabric on the loom will be put to shame.
10 Her weavers will be crushed; All the hired workers will grieve.
11 The princes of Zoʹan are foolish. The wisest advisers of Pharʹaoh give unreasonable advice. How can you say to Pharʹaoh: “I am a descendant of wise ones, A descendant of ancient kings”?
12 Where, then, are your wise men? Let them tell you if they know what Jehovah of armies has decided concerning Egypt.
13 The princes of Zoʹan have acted foolishly; The princes of Noph have been deceived; The chiefs of her tribes have led Egypt astray.
14 Jehovah has poured out on her a spirit of confusion; And they have led Egypt astray in whatever she does, Like a drunk staggering in his vomit.
15 And Egypt will not have any work to do, Whether for the head or the tail, the shoot or the rush.
16 In that day Egypt will become like women, trembling and terrified because of the threatening hand that Jehovah of armies raises against it.
17 And the land of Judah will become a cause for terror to Egypt. They will feel dread at the mention of it because of the decision that Jehovah of armies has made against them.
18 In that day there will be five cities in the land of Egypt speaking the language of Caʹnaan and swearing loyalty to Jehovah of armies. One city will be called The City of Tearing Down.
19 In that day there will be an altar to Jehovah in the middle of the land of Egypt and a pillar to Jehovah at its boundary.
20 It will be for a sign and for a witness to Jehovah of armies in the land of Egypt; for they will cry out to Jehovah because of the oppressors, and he will send them a savior, a grand one, who will save them.
21 And Jehovah will become known to the Egyptians, and the Egyptians will know Jehovah in that day, and they will offer sacrifices and gifts and make a vow to Jehovah and pay it.
22 Jehovah will strike Egypt, striking and healing it; and they will return to Jehovah, and he will respond to their entreaties and heal them.
23 In that day there will be a highway out of Egypt to As·syrʹi·a. Then As·syrʹi·a will come into Egypt, and Egypt into As·syrʹi·a, and Egypt will serve God together with As·syrʹi·a.
24 In that day Israel will be the third along with Egypt and with As·syrʹi·a, a blessing in the midst of the earth,
25 for Jehovah of armies will have blessed it, saying: “Blessed be my people, Egypt, and the work of my hands, As·syrʹi·a, and my inheritance, Israel.”
20 In the year that King Sarʹgon of As·syrʹi·a sent the Tarʹtan to Ashʹdod, he fought against Ashʹdod and captured it.
2 At that time Jehovah spoke through Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz, saying: “Go, remove the sackcloth from your hips, and take your sandals off your feet.” And he did so, walking about naked and barefoot.
3 Jehovah then said: “Just as my servant Isaiah has walked about naked and barefoot for three years as a sign and a portent against Egypt and E·thi·oʹpi·a,
4 so the king of As·syrʹi·a will lead the captives of Egypt and the exiles of E·thi·oʹpi·a, boys and old men, naked and barefoot and with exposed buttocks, the nakedness of Egypt.
5 And they will be terrified and will be ashamed of E·thi·oʹpi·a their hope and of Egypt their pride.
6 The inhabitants of this coastland will say in that day, ‘Look at what happened to our hope, to which we fled for help and rescue from the king of As·syrʹi·a! How will we escape now?’”
21 A pronouncement against the wilderness of the sea: It is coming like storm winds that sweep through in the south, From the wilderness, from a fearsome land.
2 A harsh vision has been told to me: The treacherous one is acting treacherously, And the destroyer is destroying. Go up, O Eʹlam! Lay siege, O Meʹdi·a! I will put an end to all the sighing she caused.
3 That is why I am in great anguish. Convulsions have seized me, Like those of a woman giving birth. I am too distressed to hear; I am too disturbed to see.
4 My heart falters; I shudder in terror. The twilight I longed for makes me tremble.
5 Set the table and arrange the seats! Eat and drink! Get up, you princes, anoint the shield!
6 For this is what Jehovah said to me: “Go, post a lookout and have him report what he sees.”
7 And he saw a war chariot with a team of horses, A war chariot of donkeys, A war chariot of camels. He watched carefully, with great attentiveness.
8 Then he called out like a lion: “Upon the watchtower, O Jehovah, I am standing constantly by day, And I am stationed at my guardpost every night.
9 Look at what is coming: Men in a war chariot with a team of horses!” Then he spoke up and said: “She has fallen! Babylon has fallen! All the graven images of her gods he has shattered to the ground!”
10 O my people who have been threshed, The product of my threshing floor, I have reported to you what I have heard from Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel.
11 A pronouncement against Duʹmah: Someone is calling out to me from Seʹir: “Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the night?”
12 The watchman said: “The morning is coming, and also the night. If you would inquire, inquire. Come again!”
13 A pronouncement against the desert plain: In the forest in the desert plain you will spend the night, O caravans of Deʹdan.
14 Bring water to meet the thirsty one, You inhabitants of the land of Teʹma, And bring bread for the one fleeing.
15 For they have fled from the swords, from the drawn sword, From the bent bow, and from the cruelty of the war.
16 For this is what Jehovah said to me: “Within one year, like the years of a hired worker, all the glory of Keʹdar will come to an end.
17 The remaining bowmen of the warriors of Keʹdar will be few, for Jehovah the God of Israel has spoken.”
22 A pronouncement about the Valley of Vision: What is the matter with you that you have all gone up to the roofs?
2 You were full of turmoil, A boisterous city, an exultant town. Your slain were not slain with the sword, Nor did they die in battle.
3 All your dictators have fled together. They were taken prisoner without need of a bow. All who were found were taken prisoner, Even though they had fled far away.
4 That is why I said: “Turn your eyes away from me, And I will weep bitterly. Do not insist on comforting me Over the destruction of the daughter of my people.
5 For it is a day of confusion and of defeat and of panic, From the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, In the Valley of Vision. There is a demolishing of the wall And a cry to the mountain.
6 Eʹlam picks up the quiver With manned chariots and horses, And Kir uncovers the shield.
7 Your choicest valleys Will become full of war chariots, And the horses will take their positions at the gate,
8 And the screen of Judah will be removed. “In that day you will look toward the armory of the House of the Forest,
9 and you will see the many breaches of the City of David. And you will collect the waters of the lower pool.
10 You will count the houses of Jerusalem, and you will pull down the houses to reinforce the wall.
11 And you will make a basin between the two walls for the water of the old pool, but you will not look to its Grand Maker, and you will not see the One who formed it long ago.
12 In that day the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, Will call for weeping and mourning, For shaved heads and the wearing of sackcloth.
13 But instead, there is celebration and rejoicing, The killing of cattle and the slaughtering of sheep, The eating of meat and the drinking of wine. ‘Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we will die.’”
14 Then Jehovah of armies revealed himself in my ears: “‘This error will not be atoned in your behalf until you people die,’ says the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies.”
15 This is what the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, says: “Go in to this steward, to Shebʹna, who is in charge of the house, and say,
16 ‘What is your interest here, and who is there of interest to you here, that you hewed out a burial place here for yourself?’ He is hewing out his burial place in a high place; he is cutting out a resting-place for himself in a crag.
17 ‘Look! Jehovah will hurl you down violently, O man, and seize you forcibly.
18 He will certainly wrap you up tightly and hurl you like a ball into a wide land. There you will die, and there your glorious chariots will be, a disgrace to your master’s house.
19 And I will depose you from your position and throw you out of your office.
20 “‘In that day I will call my servant E·liʹa·kim the son of Hil·kiʹah,
21 and I will clothe him with your robe and firmly bind your sash around him, and I will give your authority into his hand. And he will be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem and to the house of Judah.
22 And I will put the key of the house of David on his shoulder. He will open and no one will shut; and he will shut and no one will open.
23 I will drive him in as a peg in a lasting place, and he will become as a throne of glory to the house of his father.
24 And they will hang on him all the glory of the house of his father, the descendants and the offspring, all the small vessels, the bowl-shaped vessels, as well as all the large jars.
25 “‘In that day,’ declares Jehovah of armies, ‘the peg that is driven in a lasting place will be removed, and it will be cut down and fall, and the load that it supported will fall to ruin, for Jehovah himself has spoken.’”
24 Look! Jehovah is emptying the land and making it desolate. He turns it upside down and scatters its inhabitants.
2 It will be the same for everyone: The people as well as the priest, The servant and his master, The servant and her mistress, The buyer and the seller, The lender and the borrower, The creditor and the debtor.
3 The land will be completely emptied; It will be completely plundered, For Jehovah has spoken this word.
4 The land mourns; it is wasting away. The productive land withers; it is fading away. The prominent people of the land wither.
5 The land has been polluted by its inhabitants, For they have bypassed the laws, Changed the regulation, And broken the lasting covenant.
6 That is why the curse devours the land, And those inhabiting it are held guilty. That is why the inhabitants of the land have dwindled, And very few men are left.
7 The new wine mourns, the vine withers, And all those cheerful at heart are sighing.
8 The joy of the tambourines has ceased; The noise of the revelers has ended; The happy sound of the harp has ceased.
9 They drink wine without song, And alcohol tastes bitter to those drinking it.
10 The deserted town is broken down; Every house is shut up so that no one can enter.
11 They cry out for wine in the streets. All rejoicing has disappeared; The joy of the land has gone.
12 The city is left in ruins; The gate has been crushed to a heap of rubble.
13 For this is how it will be in the land, among the peoples: As when an olive tree is beaten, Like the gleaning when the grape harvest comes to an end.
14 They will raise their voice, They will shout joyfully. From the sea they will proclaim the majesty of Jehovah.
15 That is why they will glorify Jehovah in the region of light; In the islands of the sea they will glorify the name of Jehovah the God of Israel.
16 From the ends of the earth we hear songs: “Glory to the Righteous One!” But I say: “I am wasting away, I am wasting away! Woe to me! The treacherous have acted treacherously; With treachery the treacherous have acted treacherously.”
17 Terror and pits and traps await you, inhabitant of the land.
18 Anyone fleeing from the sound of terror will fall into the pit, And anyone coming up from the pit will be caught in the trap. For the floodgates above will be opened, And the foundations of the land will quake.
19 The land has burst apart; The land has been shaken up; The land convulses violently.
20 The land staggers like a drunken man, And it sways back and forth like a hut in the wind. Its transgression weighs heavily on it, And it will fall, so that it will not rise up again.
21 In that day Jehovah will turn his attention to the army of the heights above And to the kings of the earth upon the earth.
22 And they will be gathered together Like prisoners gathered into a pit, And they will be shut up in the dungeon; After many days they will be given attention.
23 The full moon will be abashed, And the shining sun will be ashamed, For Jehovah of armies has become King in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem, Glorious before the elders of his people.
25 O Jehovah, you are my God. I exalt you, I praise your name, For you have done wonderful things, Things purposed from ancient times, In faithfulness, in trustworthiness.
2 For you have turned a city into a pile of stones, A fortified town into a crumbling ruin. The foreigner’s tower is a city no more; It will never be rebuilt.
3 That is why a strong people will glorify you; The city of tyrannical nations will fear you.
4 For you have become a stronghold to the lowly, A stronghold to the poor in his distress, A refuge from the rainstorm, And a shade from the heat. When the blast of the tyrants is like a rainstorm against a wall,
5 As the heat in a parched land, You subdue the uproar of strangers. Like heat is subdued by the shadow of a cloud, So the song of the tyrants is silenced.
6 In this mountain Jehovah of armies will make for all the peoples A banquet of rich dishes, A banquet of fine wine, Of rich dishes filled with marrow, Of fine, filtered wine.
7 In this mountain he will do away with the shroud that is enveloping all the peoples And the covering that is woven over all the nations.
8 He will swallow up death forever, And the Sovereign Lord Jehovah will wipe away the tears from all faces. The reproach of his people he will take away from all the earth, For Jehovah himself has spoken it.
9 In that day they will say: “Look! This is our God! We have hoped in him, And he will save us. This is Jehovah! We have hoped in him. Let us be joyful and rejoice in the salvation by him.”
10 For the hand of Jehovah will rest on this mountain, And Moʹab will be trampled on in its place Like straw trampled into a pile of manure.
11 He will slap out his hands into it Like a swimmer slapping out his hands to swim, And he will bring down its haughtiness With the skillful movements of his hands.
12 And the fortified city, with your high walls of security, He will bring down; He will knock it down to the ground, to the very dust.
26 In that day this song will be sung in the land of Judah: “We have a strong city. He makes salvation its walls and its ramparts.
2 Open up the gates so that the righteous nation may enter, A nation that is keeping faithful conduct.
3 You will safeguard those who fully lean on you; You will give them continuous peace, Because it is in you that they trust.
4 Trust in Jehovah forever, For Jah Jehovah is the eternal Rock.
5 For he has brought low those inhabiting the height, the lofty city. He brings it down, He brings it down to the earth; He casts it down to the dust.
6 The foot will trample it, The feet of the afflicted, the steps of the lowly.”
7 The path of the righteous one is upright. Because you are upright, You will smooth out the course of the righteous.
8 As we follow the path of your judgments, O Jehovah, Our hope is in you. We long for your name and your memorial.
9 In the night I long for you with my whole being, Yes, my spirit keeps looking for you; For when there are judgments from you for the earth, The inhabitants of the land learn about righteousness.
10 Even if the wicked is shown favor, He will not learn righteousness. Even in the land of uprightness he will act wickedly, And he will not see the majesty of Jehovah.
11 O Jehovah, your hand is raised, but they do not see it. They will see your zeal for your people and be put to shame. Yes, the fire for your adversaries will consume them.
12 O Jehovah, you will grant us peace, Because everything we have done You have accomplished for us.
13 O Jehovah our God, other masters besides you have ruled over us, But we make mention of your name alone.
14 They are dead; they will not live. Powerless in death, they will not rise up. For you have turned your attention to them To annihilate them and destroy all mention of them.
15 You have enlarged the nation, O Jehovah, You have enlarged the nation; You have glorified yourself. You have greatly extended all the borders of the land.
16 O Jehovah, during distress they turned to you; They poured out their prayer in a whisper when you disciplined them.
17 Just as a pregnant woman about to give birth Has labor pains and cries out in pain, So we have been because of you, O Jehovah.
18 We became pregnant, we had labor pains, But it is as if we have given birth to wind. We have not brought salvation to the land, And no one is born to inhabit the land.
19 “Your dead will live. My corpses will rise up. Awake and shout joyfully, You residents in the dust! For your dew is as the dew of the morning, And the earth will let those powerless in death come to life.
20 Go, my people, enter your inner rooms, And shut your doors behind you. Hide yourself for a brief moment Until the wrath has passed by.
21 For look! Jehovah is coming from his place To call the inhabitants of the land to account for their error, And the land will expose her bloodshed And will no longer cover over her slain.”
27 In that day Jehovah, with his harsh and great and strong sword, Will turn his attention to Le·viʹa·than, the gliding serpent, To Le·viʹa·than, the twisting serpent, And he will kill the monster that is in the sea.
2 In that day sing to her: “A vineyard of foaming wine!
3 I, Jehovah, am safeguarding her. Every moment I water her. I safeguard her night and day, So that no one may harm her.
4 There is no wrath in me. Who will confront me with thornbushes and weeds in the battle? I will trample them and set them on fire all together.
5 Otherwise, let him hold fast to my stronghold. Let him make peace with me; Peace let him make with me.”
6 In the coming days Jacob will take root, Israel will blossom and sprout, And they will fill the land with produce.
7 Must he be struck with the stroke of the one striking him? Or must he be killed as with the slaughter of his slain?
8 With a startling cry you will contend with her when sending her away. He will expel her with his fierce blast in the day of the east wind.
9 So in this way the error of Jacob will be atoned for, And this will be the full fruitage when his sin is taken away: He will make all the stones of the altar Like chalkstones that have been pulverized, And no sacred poles or incense stands will be left.
10 For the fortified city will be deserted; The pastures will be forsaken and abandoned like a wilderness. There the calf will graze and lie down And will consume her branches.
11 When her twigs have dried up, Women will come and break them off, Making fires with them. For this people is without understanding. That is why their Maker will show them no mercy, And the One who formed them will show them no favor.
12 In that day Jehovah will beat out the fruit from the flowing stream of the River to the Wadi of Egypt, and you will be gathered up one after the other, O people of Israel.
13 In that day a great horn will be blown, and those who are perishing in the land of As·syrʹi·a and those dispersed in the land of Egypt will come and bow down to Jehovah in the holy mountain in Jerusalem.
28 Woe to the showy crown of the drunkards of Eʹphra·im And the fading blossom of its glorious beauty, Which is on the head of the fertile valley of those overcome with wine!
2 Look! Jehovah has someone strong and mighty. Like a thundering hailstorm, a destructive windstorm, Like a thunderstorm of powerful floodwaters, He will forcefully hurl it down to the earth.
3 The showy crowns of the drunkards of Eʹphra·im Will be trampled underfoot.
4 And the fading flower of its glorious beauty, Which is on the head of the fertile valley, Will become like the early fig before summer. When someone sees it, he swallows it as soon as it is in his hand.
5 In that day Jehovah of armies will become a glorious crown and a beautiful garland to those left of his people.
6 And he will become a spirit of justice to the one who sits in judgment and a source of mightiness to those who repel the attack at the gate.
7 And these also go astray because of wine; Their alcoholic beverages make them stagger. Priest and prophet go astray because of alcohol; The wine confuses them, And they stagger from their alcohol; Their vision makes them go astray, And they stumble in judgment.
8 For their tables are full of filthy vomit —There is no place without it.
9 To whom will one impart knowledge, And to whom will one explain the message? To those who have just been weaned from milk, Those just taken away from the breasts?
10 For it is “command after command, command after command, Line by line, line by line, A little here, a little there.”
11 So by means of those with stammering speech and a foreign language, he will speak to this people.
12 He once told them: “This is the resting-place. Let the weary one rest; this is the place of refreshment,” but they refused to listen.
13 So to them the word of Jehovah will be: “Command after command, command after command, Line by line, line by line, A little here, a little there,” So that when they walk, They will stumble and fall backward And be broken and ensnared and caught.
14 So hear the word of Jehovah, you boasters, You rulers of this people in Jerusalem,
15 For you men say: “We have made a covenant with Death, And with the Grave we have made an agreement. When the raging flash flood passes through, It will not reach us, For we have made a lie our refuge And we have hidden ourselves in falsehood.”
16 Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am laying as a foundation in Zion a tested stone, The precious cornerstone of a sure foundation. No one exercising faith will panic.
17 And I will make justice the measuring line And righteousness the leveling tool. The hail will sweep away the refuge of lies, And the waters will flood out the hiding place.
18 Your covenant with Death will be dissolved, And your agreement with the Grave will not stand. When the raging flash flood passes through, You will be crushed by it.
19 As often as it passes through, It will sweep you away; For it will pass through morning after morning, During the day and during the night. Only terror will make them understand what was heard.”
20 For the bed is too short to stretch out on, And the woven sheet is too narrow to wrap up in.
21 For Jehovah will rise up as at Mount Pe·raʹzim; He will rouse himself as in the valley near Gibʹe·on, That he may do his deed—his strange deed— And that he may carry out his work—his unusual work.
22 Now do not scoff, So that your bonds may not be further tightened, For I have heard from the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, That an extermination has been determined for all the land.
23 Give ear and listen to my voice; Pay attention and listen to what I say.
24 Does the plower keep plowing all day before he sows seed? Does he continually break up and harrow his ground?
25 When he has smoothed out its surface, Does he not then scatter black cumin and sow cumin, And does he not plant wheat, millet, and barley in their places And spelt around the edges?
26 For He teaches him the right way; His God instructs him.
27 For black cumin is not crushed with a threshing sledge, And a wagon wheel is not driven over cumin. Rather, black cumin is beaten out with a rod, And cumin with a staff.
28 Does a person crush grain for bread? No, he does not thresh it incessantly; And when he drives the roller of his wagon over it with his horses, He does not crush it.
29 This also comes from Jehovah of armies, Whose counsel is wonderful And whose achievements are great.
29 “Woe to Arʹi·el, Arʹi·el, the city where David encamped! Continue year after year; Let the cycle of festivals continue.
2 But I will bring distress on Arʹi·el, And there will be mourning and lamentation, And she will become to me like an altar hearth of God.
3 I will encamp on all sides against you, And I will besiege you with a palisade And raise up siegeworks against you.
4 You will be brought low; From the ground you will speak, And what you say will be muffled by dust. Your voice will come from the ground Like the voice of a spirit medium, And your words will chirp from the dust.
5 The crowd of your enemies will be like fine powder, The crowd of the tyrants just like the blowing chaff. And it will happen in an instant, suddenly.
6 Jehovah of armies will give you his attention With thunder and earthquake and a great noise, With storm wind and tempest and the flames of a consuming fire.”
7 Then the crowd of all the nations waging war against Arʹi·el —All those waging war against her, The siege towers against her, And those bringing distress on her— Will become like a dream, a vision of the night.
8 Yes, it will be just as when someone hungry dreams that he is eating, But he wakes up hungry, And as when someone thirsty dreams that he is drinking, But he wakes up tired and thirsty. So it will happen with the crowd of all the nations That wage war against Mount Zion.
9 Be stunned and amazed; Blind yourselves and be blinded. They are drunk, but not with wine; They are staggering, but not from alcohol.
10 For Jehovah has poured a spirit of deep sleep on you; He has closed your eyes, the prophets, And he has covered your heads, the visionaries.
11 Every vision becomes for you like the words of a sealed book. When they give it to someone who can read, saying: “Read this out loud, please,” he will say: “I cannot, for it is sealed up.”
12 And when they give the book to someone who cannot read, saying: “Read this, please,” he will say: “I cannot read at all.”
13 Jehovah says: “This people approaches me with their mouth And they honor me with their lips, But their heart is far removed from me; And their fear of me is based on commands of men that they have been taught.
14 Therefore, I am the One who will again do wonderful things with this people, With wonder upon wonder; And the wisdom of their wise men will perish, And the understanding of their discreet men will be hidden.”
15 Woe to those who go to great lengths to conceal their plans from Jehovah. Their deeds are done in a dark place, While they say: “Who sees us? Who knows about us?”
16 How you twist things! Should the potter be regarded the same as the clay? Should what is made say about its maker: “He did not make me”? And does what is formed say about its former: “He shows no understanding”?
17 In just a short time, Lebʹa·non will be turned into an orchard, And the orchard will be regarded as a forest.
18 In that day the deaf will hear the words of the book, And out of the gloom and darkness the eyes of the blind will see.
19 The meek will rejoice greatly in Jehovah, And the poor among men will be joyful in the Holy One of Israel.
20 For the tyrant will be no more, The boaster will come to his finish, And all those keeping alert to do harm will be destroyed,
21 Those who with a false word make others guilty, Who lay traps for the defender in the city gate, And who with empty arguments deny justice to the righteous one.
22 So this is what Jehovah, who redeemed Abraham, says to the house of Jacob: “Jacob will no longer be ashamed, And no more will his face grow pale.
23 For when he sees his children, Who are the work of my hands, in his midst, They will sanctify my name; Yes, they will sanctify the Holy One of Jacob, And they will stand in awe of the God of Israel.
24 Those who are wayward in spirit will acquire understanding, And those who complain will accept instruction.”
30 “Woe to the stubborn sons,” declares Jehovah, “Who carry out plans that are not mine, Who make alliances, but not by my spirit, In order to add sin to sin.
2 They go down to Egypt without consulting me, To take shelter under Pharʹaoh’s protection And to take refuge in the shadow of Egypt!
3 But the protection of Pharʹaoh will become for you a reason for shame, And refuge in Egypt’s shadow a cause for humiliation.
4 For his princes are in Zoʹan, And his envoys have reached Haʹnes.
5 They will all be put to shame By a people who can bring no benefit to them, Who offer no help and no benefit, Only shame and disgrace.”
6 A pronouncement against the beasts of the south: Through the land of distress and hardship, Of the lion, the roaring lion, Of the viper and the flying fiery snake, They carry their wealth on the backs of donkeys And their supplies on the humps of camels. But these things will not benefit the people.
7 For Egypt’s help is completely useless. So I have called this one: “Raʹhab, who sits still.”
8 “Now go, write it on a tablet in their presence, And inscribe it in a book, So that it may serve for a future day As a permanent witness.
9 For they are a rebellious people, deceitful sons, Sons who are unwilling to hear the law of Jehovah.
10 They say to the seers, ‘Do not see,’ And to the visionaries, ‘Do not tell us truthful visions. Tell us flattering things; envision deceptive illusions.
11 Turn aside from the way; deviate from the path. Quit putting before us the Holy One of Israel.’”
12 Therefore this is what the Holy One of Israel says: “Since you reject this word And you trust in fraud and deceit And you rely on these,
13 So this error will be for you like a broken wall, Like a bulging high wall ready to fall. It will crash suddenly, in an instant.
14 It will be broken like a large potter’s jar, So completely smashed that no fragment among its pieces will be left To rake the fire from the fireplace Or to scoop water from a puddle.”
15 For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, the Holy One of Israel, says: “By returning to me and resting, you will be saved; Your strength will be in keeping calm and showing trust.” But you were unwilling.
16 Instead, you said: “No, we will flee on horses!” So flee you will. “And on swift horses we will ride!” So those pursuing you will be swift.
17 A thousand will tremble at the threat of one; At the threat of five you will flee Until what is left of you is like a mast on the top of a mountain, Like a signal pole on a hill.
18 But Jehovah is waiting patiently to show you favor, And he will rise up to show you mercy. For Jehovah is a God of justice. Happy are all those keeping in expectation of him.
19 When the people dwell in Zion, in Jerusalem, you will by no means weep. He will surely show you favor at the sound of your cry for help; he will answer you as soon as he hears it.
20 Though Jehovah will give you bread in the form of distress and water in the form of oppression, your Grand Instructor will no longer hide himself, and you will see your Grand Instructor with your own eyes.
21 And your own ears will hear a word behind you saying, “This is the way. Walk in it,” in case you should go to the right or in case you should go to the left.
22 And you will defile the silver overlay of your graven images and the golden plating of your metal statues. You will cast them away like a menstrual cloth and say to them, “Be gone!”
23 And he will give the rain for the seed you sow in the ground, and the bread that the ground produces will be abundant and rich. In that day your livestock will graze in spacious pastures.
24 And the cattle and the donkeys that work the ground will eat fodder seasoned with sorrel, which was winnowed with the shovel and the pitchfork.
25 And on every tall mountain and on every high hill will be streams and watercourses, in the day of the great slaughter when the towers fall.
26 And the light of the full moon will become like the light of the sun; and the light of the sun will become seven times stronger, like the light of seven days, in the day that Jehovah binds up the breakdown of his people and heals the severe wound from the blow he inflicted.
27 Look! The name of Jehovah is coming from far away, Burning with his anger and with heavy clouds. His lips are full of indignation, And his tongue is like a consuming fire.
28 His spirit is like a flooding torrent that reaches clear to the neck, To shake the nations in a sieve of destruction; And the peoples will have a bridle in their jaws that leads them astray.
29 But your song will be like the one sung in the night When you prepare for a festival, And your heart will rejoice like one Who walks with a flute On his way to the mountain of Jehovah, to the Rock of Israel.
30 Jehovah will make his majestic voice heard And reveal his arm as it descends in the heat of anger, With the flame of a consuming fire, A cloudburst and a thunderstorm and hailstones.
31 For because of the voice of Jehovah, As·syrʹi·a will be struck with terror; He will strike it with a rod.
32 And every swing of his rod of punishment That Jehovah will bring down on As·syrʹi·a Will be accompanied by tambourines and harps As he brandishes his arm against them in battle.
33 For his Toʹpheth is already prepared; It is also made ready for the king. He has made the woodpile deep and wide, With an abundance of fire and wood. The breath of Jehovah, like a torrent of sulfur, Will set fire to it.
31 Woe to those who go down to Egypt for assistance, Who rely on horses, Who trust in war chariots because they are numerous, And in warhorses because they are mighty. But they do not look to the Holy One of Israel, And they do not search for Jehovah.
2 But he is also wise and will bring calamity, And he will not take back his words. He will rise up against the house of evildoers And against those who help wrongdoers.
3 The Egyptians, though, are mere men and not God; Their horses are flesh and not spirit. When Jehovah stretches out his hand, Whoever offers help will stumble And whoever is helped will fall; They will all perish at the same time.
4 For this is what Jehovah has said to me: “Just as the lion growls, a strong young lion, over its prey, When a whole group of shepherds is called together against it, And it is not terrified by their voice Or daunted by their commotion, So will Jehovah of armies come down to wage war Over Mount Zion and over her hill.
5 Like swooping birds, so Jehovah of armies will defend Jerusalem. He will defend her and save her. He will spare her and rescue her.”
6 “Return to the One against whom you have blatantly revolted, O people of Israel.
7 For in that day each one will reject his worthless gods of silver and his valueless gods of gold, which your own hands sinfully made.
8 And the As·syrʹi·an will fall by the sword, not of a man; And a sword, not of a human, will devour him. He will flee because of the sword, And his young men will be put to forced labor.
9 His crag will pass away because of sheer fright, And his princes will be terrified because of the signal pole,” declares Jehovah, Whose light is in Zion and whose furnace is in Jerusalem.
32 Look! A king will reign for righteousness, And princes will rule for justice.
2 And each one will be like a hiding place from the wind, A place of concealment from the rainstorm, Like streams of water in a waterless land, Like the shadow of a massive crag in a parched land.
3 Then the eyes of those seeing will no longer be pasted shut, And the ears of those hearing will pay attention.
4 The heart of those who are impetuous will ponder over knowledge, And the stammering tongue will speak fluently and clearly.
5 The senseless one will no longer be called generous, And the unprincipled man will not be called noble;
6 For the senseless one will speak nonsense, And his heart will devise harmful things, To promote apostasy and to speak what is wayward against Jehovah, To cause the hungry one to go unfed And to deprive the thirsty one of something to drink.
7 The devices of the unprincipled man are bad; He promotes shameful conduct To ruin the afflicted one with lies, Even when the poor speaks what is right.
8 But the generous one has generous intentions, And in generous endeavors he perseveres.
9 “You complacent women, get up and listen to my voice! You carefree daughters, pay attention to what I say!
10 In a little over a year, you who are carefree will shudder, Because no fruit will have been gathered when the grape harvest ends.
11 Tremble, you complacent women! Shudder, you who are carefree! Strip yourselves bare, And put sackcloth around your hips.
12 Beat your breasts in lamentation Over the desirable fields and the fruitful vine.
13 For the ground of my people will be covered with thorns and briars; They will cover all the houses of rejoicing, Yes, the city of exultation.
14 For the fortified tower has been forsaken; The noisy city has been abandoned. Oʹphel and the watchtower have become a permanent wasteland, A delight for wild donkeys, A pasture for the flocks,
15 Until the spirit is poured out on us from above, And the wilderness becomes an orchard, And the orchard is regarded as a forest.
16 Then justice will reside in the wilderness, And righteousness will dwell in the orchard.
17 The result of true righteousness will be peace, And the fruitage of true righteousness will be lasting tranquillity and security.
18 My people will dwell in a peaceful abiding place, In secure dwellings and in tranquil resting-places.
19 But the hail will flatten the forest, And the city will be completely leveled.
20 Happy are you who sow seed alongside all waters, Who send out the bull and the donkey.”
33 Woe to you, you destroyer who has not been destroyed; You betrayer who has not been betrayed! When you finish destroying, you will be destroyed. When you finish betraying, you will be betrayed.
2 O Jehovah, show us favor. Our hope is in you. Become our arm every morning, Yes, our salvation in the time of distress.
3 At the sound of turmoil peoples flee. When you rise up, nations scatter.
4 As the voracious locusts gather, so your spoil will be gathered; People will rush on it like swarms of locusts.
5 Jehovah will be exalted, For he resides in the heights above. He will fill Zion with justice and righteousness.
6 He is the stability of your times; An abundance of salvation, wisdom, knowledge, and the fear of Jehovah —This is his treasure.
7 Look! Their heroes cry out in the street; The messengers of peace weep bitterly.
8 The highways are deserted; There is no one traveling on the pathways. He has broken the covenant; He has rejected the cities; He shows no regard for mortal man.
9 The land mourns and withers away. Lebʹa·non is ashamed; it has decayed. Sharʹon has become like the desert, And Baʹshan and Carʹmel shake off their leaves.
10 “Now I will rise up,” says Jehovah, “Now I will exalt myself; Now I will magnify myself.
11 You conceive dried grass and give birth to stubble. Your own spirit will consume you like a fire.
12 And peoples will become as the burnings of lime. As thorns cut down, they will be set ablaze with fire.
13 You who are far away, listen to what I will do! And you who are nearby, acknowledge my might!
14 The sinners in Zion are in dread; Trembling has seized the apostates: ‘Who of us can live where there is a consuming fire? Who of us can live with unquenchable flames?’
15 The one who walks in continual righteousness, Who speaks what is upright, Who rejects dishonest, fraudulent gain, Whose hands refuse a bribe rather than grabbing it, Who closes his ear to talk of bloodshed, And who shuts his eyes to avoid seeing what is bad
16 —He will reside in the heights; His secure refuge will be in rocky strongholds, His bread will be provided, And his water supply will never fail.”
17 Your eyes will behold a king in his splendor; They will see a land far away.
18 In your heart you will recall the terror: “Where is the secretary? Where is the one who weighed out the tribute? Where is the one who counted the towers?”
19 You will no more see the insolent people, A people whose language is too obscure to comprehend, Whose stammering tongue you cannot understand.
20 Behold Zion, the city of our festivals! Your eyes will see Jerusalem as a tranquil dwelling place, A tent that will not be moved. Never will its tent pins be pulled out, And none of its ropes will be torn apart.
21 But there the Majestic One, Jehovah, Will be for us a region of rivers, of wide canals, Where no galley fleet will go And no majestic ships will pass by.
22 For Jehovah is our Judge, Jehovah is our Lawgiver, Jehovah is our King; He is the One who will save us.
23 Your ropes will hang loose; They cannot hold up the mast nor spread the sail. At that time an abundance of spoil will be divided up; Even the lame will take much plunder.
24 And no resident will say: “I am sick.” The people dwelling in the land will be pardoned for their error.
34 Come close to hear, you nations, And pay attention, you peoples. Let the earth and that which fills it listen, The land and all its produce.
2 For Jehovah’s indignation is against all the nations, And his wrath is against all their army. He will devote them to destruction; He will give them to the slaughter.
3 Their slain will be thrown out, And the stench of their carcasses will ascend; The mountains will melt because of their blood.
4 All the army of the heavens will rot away, And the heavens will be rolled up like a scroll. All their army will wither away, As a withered leaf falls from the vine And a shriveled fig from the fig tree.
5 “For in the heavens my sword will be drenched. It will descend on Eʹdom in judgment, On the people whom I devoted to destruction.
6 Jehovah has a sword; it will be covered with blood. It will be covered with the fat, With the blood of young rams and goats, With the kidney fat of rams. For Jehovah has a sacrifice in Bozʹrah, A great slaughter in the land of Eʹdom.
7 The wild bulls will go down with them, The young bulls with the powerful ones. Their land will be drenched in blood, And their dust will be soaked with fat.”
8 For Jehovah has a day of vengeance, A year of retribution for the legal case over Zion.
9 Her streams will be changed into pitch, And her dust into sulfur, And her land will become like burning pitch.
10 By night or by day it will not be extinguished; Its smoke will keep ascending forever. From generation to generation she will remain devastated; No one will pass through her forever and ever.
11 The pelican and the porcupine will possess her, And long-eared owls and ravens will reside in her. He will stretch out over her the measuring line of emptiness And the plumb line of desolation.
12 None of her nobles will be called to the kingship, And all her princes will come to nothing.
13 Thorns will grow in her fortified towers, Nettles and thorny weeds in her fortresses. She will become a lair of jackals, An enclosure for ostriches.
14 Desert creatures will meet up with howling animals, And the wild goat will call to its companion. Yes, there the nightjar will settle and find a place of rest.
15 There the arrow snake will make its nest and lay eggs, And it will hatch them and gather them in its shadow. Yes, there the kites will gather, each one with her mate.
16 Search in the book of Jehovah and read it out loud: Not one of them will be missing; None of them will be lacking a mate, For it is the mouth of Jehovah that has given the order, And it is his spirit that has gathered them together.
17 He is the One who has cast the lot for them, And his own hand has measured out their assigned place. They will possess it for all time; They will reside in it throughout all generations.
35 The wilderness and the parched land will exult, And the desert plain will be joyful and blossom as the saffron.
2 Without fail it will blossom; It will rejoice and shout for joy. The glory of Lebʹa·non will be given to it, The splendor of Carʹmel and of Sharʹon. They will see the glory of Jehovah, the splendor of our God.
3 Strengthen the weak hands, And make firm the knees that are shaking.
4 Say to those who are anxious at heart: “Be strong. Do not be afraid. Look! Your own God will come with vengeance, God will come with retribution. He will come and save you.”
5 At that time the eyes of the blind will be opened, And the ears of the deaf will be unstopped.
6 At that time the lame will leap like the deer, And the tongue of the speechless will shout for joy. For waters will burst forth in the wilderness, And streams in the desert plain.
7 The heat-parched ground will become a reedy pool, And the thirsty ground springs of water. In the lairs where jackals rested, There will be green grass and reeds and papyrus.
8 And a highway will be there, Yes, a way called the Way of Holiness. The unclean one will not travel on it. It is reserved for the one walking on the way; No one foolish will stray onto it.
9 No lion will be there, And no vicious wild beasts will come on it. They will not be found there; Only the repurchased ones will walk there.
10 Those redeemed by Jehovah will return and come to Zion with a joyful cry. Unending joy will crown their heads. Exultation and rejoicing will be theirs, And grief and sighing will flee away.
36 In the 14th year of King Hez·e·kiʹah, Sen·nachʹer·ib the king of As·syrʹi·a came up against all the fortified cities of Judah and captured them.
2 The king of As·syrʹi·a then sent the Rabʹsha·keh with a vast army from Laʹchish to King Hez·e·kiʹah in Jerusalem. They took up a position by the conduit of the upper pool, which is at the highway of the laundryman’s field.
3 Then E·liʹa·kim son of Hil·kiʹah, who was in charge of the household, Shebʹna the secretary, and Joʹah son of Aʹsaph the recorder came out to him.
4 So the Rabʹsha·keh said to them: “Please, say to Hez·e·kiʹah, ‘This is what the great king, the king of As·syrʹi·a, says: “What is the basis for your confidence?
5 You are saying, ‘I have a strategy and the power to wage war,’ but these are empty words. In whom have you put trust, so that you dare to rebel against me?
6 Look! You trust in the support of this crushed reed, Egypt, which if a man should lean on it would enter into his palm and pierce it. That is the way Pharʹaoh king of Egypt is to all those who trust in him.
7 And if you should say to me, ‘We trust in Jehovah our God,’ is he not the one whose high places and altars Hez·e·kiʹah has removed, while he says to Judah and Jerusalem, ‘You should bow down before this altar’?”’
8 So now make this wager, please, with my lord the king of As·syrʹi·a: I will give you 2,000 horses if you are able to find enough riders for them.
9 How, then, could you drive back even one governor who is the least of my lord’s servants, while you put your trust in Egypt for chariots and for horsemen?
10 Now is it without authorization from Jehovah that I have come up against this land to destroy it? Jehovah himself said to me, ‘Go up against this land and destroy it.’”
11 At this E·liʹa·kim and Shebʹna and Joʹah said to the Rabʹsha·keh: “Speak to your servants, please, in the Ar·a·maʹic language, for we can understand it; do not speak to us in the language of the Jews in the hearing of the people on the wall.”
12 But the Rabʹsha·keh said: “Is it just to your lord and to you that my lord sent me to speak these words? Is it not also to the men who sit on the wall, those who will eat their own excrement and drink their own urine along with you?”
13 Then the Rabʹsha·keh stood and called out loudly in the language of the Jews, saying: “Hear the word of the great king, the king of As·syrʹi·a.
14 This is what the king says, ‘Do not let Hez·e·kiʹah deceive you, for he is not able to rescue you.
15 And do not let Hez·e·kiʹah cause you to trust in Jehovah by saying: “Jehovah will surely rescue us, and this city will not be given into the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a.”
16 Do not listen to Hez·e·kiʹah, for this is what the king of As·syrʹi·a says: “Make peace with me and surrender, and each of you will eat from his own vine and from his own fig tree and will drink the water of his own cistern,
17 until I come and take you to a land like your own land, a land of grain and new wine, a land of bread and vineyards.
18 Do not let Hez·e·kiʹah mislead you by saying, ‘Jehovah will rescue us.’ Have any of the gods of the nations rescued their land out of the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a?
19 Where are the gods of Haʹmath and Arʹpad? Where are the gods of Seph·ar·vaʹim? And have they rescued Sa·marʹi·a out of my hand?
20 Who among all the gods of these lands have rescued their land out of my hand, so that Jehovah should rescue Jerusalem out of my hand?”’”
21 But they kept silent and did not say a word to him in reply, for the order of the king was, “You must not answer him.”
22 But E·liʹa·kim son of Hil·kiʹah, who was in charge of the household, Shebʹna the secretary, and Joʹah son of Aʹsaph the recorder came to Hez·e·kiʹah with their garments ripped apart and told him the words of the Rabʹsha·keh.
37 As soon as King Hez·e·kiʹah heard this, he ripped his garments apart and covered himself with sackcloth and went into the house of Jehovah.
2 Then he sent E·liʹa·kim, who was in charge of the household, Shebʹna the secretary, and the elders of the priests, covered with sackcloth, to the prophet Isaiah, the son of Aʹmoz.
3 They said to him: “This is what Hez·e·kiʹah says, ‘This day is a day of distress, of rebuke, and of disgrace; for the children are ready to be born, but there is no strength to give birth.
4 Perhaps Jehovah your God will hear the words of the Rabʹsha·keh, whom the king of As·syrʹi·a his lord sent to taunt the living God, and he will call him to account for the words that Jehovah your God has heard. So offer up a prayer in behalf of the remnant who have survived.’”
5 So the servants of King Hez·e·kiʹah went in to Isaiah,
6 and Isaiah said to them: “This is what you should say to your lord, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Do not be afraid because of the words that you heard, the words with which the attendants of the king of As·syrʹi·a blasphemed me.
7 Here I am putting a thought in his mind, and he will hear a report and return to his own land; and I will make him fall by the sword in his own land.”’”
8 After the Rabʹsha·keh heard that the king of As·syrʹi·a had pulled away from Laʹchish, he returned to him and found him fighting against Libʹnah.
9 Now the king heard it said about King Tir·haʹkah of E·thi·oʹpi·a: “He has come out to fight against you.” When he heard this, he sent messengers again to Hez·e·kiʹah, saying:
10 “This is what you should say to King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah, ‘Do not let your God in whom you trust deceive you by saying: “Jerusalem will not be given into the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a.”
11 Look! You have heard what the kings of As·syrʹi·a did to all the lands by devoting them to destruction. Will you alone be rescued?
12 Did the gods of the nations that my forefathers destroyed rescue them? Where are Goʹzan, Haʹran, Reʹzeph, and the people of Eʹden who were in Tel-asʹsar?
13 Where is the king of Haʹmath, the king of Arʹpad, and the king of the cities of Seph·ar·vaʹim, and of Heʹna, and of Ivʹvah?’”
14 Hez·e·kiʹah took the letters out of the hand of the messengers and read them. Hez·e·kiʹah then went up to the house of Jehovah and spread them out before Jehovah.
15 And Hez·e·kiʹah began to pray to Jehovah and say:
16 “O Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, sitting enthroned above the cherubs, you alone are the true God of all the kingdoms of the earth. You made the heavens and the earth.
17 Incline your ear, O Jehovah, and hear! Open your eyes, O Jehovah, and see! Hear all the words that Sen·nachʹer·ib has sent to taunt the living God.
18 It is a fact, O Jehovah, that the kings of As·syrʹi·a have devastated all the lands, as well as their own land.
19 And they have thrown their gods into the fire, because they were not gods but the work of human hands, wood and stone. That is why they could destroy them.
20 But now, O Jehovah our God, save us out of his hand, so that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that you alone are God, O Jehovah.”
21 Isaiah son of Aʹmoz then sent this message to Hez·e·kiʹah: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘Because you prayed to me concerning King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a,
22 this is the word that Jehovah has spoken against him: “The virgin daughter of Zion despises you, she scoffs at you. The daughter of Jerusalem shakes her head at you.
23 Whom have you taunted and blasphemed? Against whom have you raised your voice And lifted your arrogant eyes? It is against the Holy One of Israel!
24 Through your servants you have taunted Jehovah and said, ‘With the multitude of my war chariots I will ascend the heights of mountains, The remotest parts of Lebʹa·non. I will cut down its lofty cedars, its choice juniper trees. I will enter its highest retreats, its densest forests.
25 I will dig wells and drink waters; I will dry up the streams of Egypt with the soles of my feet.’
26 Have you not heard? From long ago it was determined. From days gone by I have prepared it. Now I will bring it about. You will turn fortified cities into desolate piles of ruins.
27 Their inhabitants will be helpless; They will be terrified and put to shame. They will become as vegetation of the field and green grass, As grass of the roofs that is scorched by the east wind.
28 But I well know when you sit, when you go out, when you come in, And when you are enraged against me,
29 Because your rage against me and your roaring have reached my ears. So I will put my hook in your nose and my bridle between your lips, And I will lead you back the way you came.”
30 “‘And this will be the sign for you: This year you will eat what grows on its own; and in the second year, you will eat grain that sprouts from that; but in the third year you will sow seed and reap, and you will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage.
31 Those of the house of Judah who escape, those who are left, will take root downward and produce fruit upward.
32 For a remnant will go out of Jerusalem and survivors from Mount Zion. The zeal of Jehovah of armies will do this.
33 “‘Therefore this is what Jehovah says about the king of As·syrʹi·a: “He will not come into this city Or shoot an arrow there Or confront it with a shield Or cast up a siege rampart against it.”’
34 ‘By the way he came he will return; He will not come into this city,’ declares Jehovah.
35 ‘I will defend this city and save it for my own sake And for the sake of my servant David.’”
36 And the angel of Jehovah went out and struck down 185,000 men in the camp of the As·syrʹi·ans. When people rose up early in the morning, they saw all the dead bodies.
37 So King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a departed and returned to Ninʹe·veh and stayed there.
38 And as he was bowing down at the house of his god Nisʹroch, his own sons A·dramʹme·lech and Shar·eʹzer struck him down with the sword and then escaped to the land of Arʹa·rat. And his son Eʹsar-hadʹdon became king in his place.
39 At that time the king of Babylon, Merʹo·dach-balʹa·dan son of Balʹa·dan, sent letters and a gift to Hez·e·kiʹah, for he had heard that he had been sick and had recovered.
2 Hez·e·kiʹah gladly welcomed them and showed them his treasure-house—the silver, the gold, the balsam oil and other precious oil, his whole armory, and everything that was to be found in his treasuries. There was nothing that Hez·e·kiʹah did not show them in his own house and in all his dominion.
3 After that Isaiah the prophet came in to King Hez·e·kiʹah and asked him: “What did these men say, and where did they come from?” So Hez·e·kiʹah said: “They came from a distant land, from Babylon.”
4 Next he asked: “What did they see in your house?” Hez·e·kiʹah replied: “They saw everything in my house. There was nothing that I did not show them in my treasuries.”
5 Isaiah now said to Hez·e·kiʹah: “Hear the word of Jehovah of armies,
6 ‘Look! Days are coming, and all that is in your house and all that your forefathers have stored up to this day will be carried off to Babylon. Nothing will be left,’ says Jehovah.
7 ‘And some of your own sons to whom you will become father will be taken and will become court officials in the palace of the king of Babylon.’”
8 At that Hez·e·kiʹah said to Isaiah: “The word of Jehovah that you have spoken is good.” Then he added: “Because there will be peace and stability during my lifetime.”
40 “Comfort, comfort my people,” says your God.
2 “Speak to the heart of Jerusalem, And proclaim to her that her compulsory service has been fulfilled, That her guilt has been paid off. From the hand of Jehovah she has received a full amount for all her sins.”
3 A voice of one calling out in the wilderness: “Clear up the way of Jehovah! Make a straight highway through the desert for our God.
4 Let every valley be raised up, And every mountain and hill be made low. The rough ground must become level, And the rugged ground a valley plain.
5 The glory of Jehovah will be revealed, And all flesh will see it together, For the mouth of Jehovah has spoken.”
6 Listen! Someone is saying: “Call out!” Another asks: “What should I call out?” “All flesh is green grass. All their loyal love is like the blossom of the field.
7 The green grass dries up, The blossom withers, Because the breath of Jehovah blows upon it. Surely the people are but green grass.
8 The green grass dries up, The blossom withers, But the word of our God endures forever.”
9 Go up onto a high mountain, You woman bringing good news for Zion. Raise your voice with power, You woman bringing good news for Jerusalem. Raise it, do not be afraid. Announce to the cities of Judah: “Here is your God.”
10 Look! The Sovereign Lord Jehovah will come with power, And his arm will rule for him. Look! His reward is with him, And the wage he pays is before him.
11 Like a shepherd he will care for his flock. With his arm he will gather together the lambs, And in his bosom he will carry them. He will gently lead those nursing their young.
12 Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand And taken the measurements of the heavens with a span of his hand? Who has gathered in a measure the dust of the earth Or weighed the mountains in the balances And the hills in the scales?
13 Who has taken the measurements of the spirit of Jehovah, And who can instruct him as his adviser?
14 With whom did he consult to gain understanding, Or who teaches him in the path of justice, Or teaches him knowledge, Or shows him the way of true understanding?
15 Look! The nations are like a drop from a bucket, And as the film of dust on the scales they are regarded. Look! He lifts up the islands like fine dust.
16 Even Lebʹa·non is not sufficient to keep a fire burning, And its wild animals are not sufficient for a burnt offering.
17 All the nations are as something nonexistent in front of him; He regards them as nothing, as an unreality.
18 To whom can you compare God? What likeness can you put next to him?
19 The craftsman casts an idol, The metalworker overlays it with gold, And he forges silver chains.
20 He chooses a tree for his contribution, A tree that will not rot. He searches for a skilled craftsman To prepare a carved image that will not topple over.
21 Do you not know? Have you not heard? Has it not been told to you from the beginning? Have you not understood from the foundations of the earth?
22 There is One who dwells above the circle of the earth, And its inhabitants are like grasshoppers. He is stretching out the heavens like a fine gauze, And he spreads them out like a tent to dwell in.
23 He reduces high officials to nothing And makes the judges of the earth an unreality.
24 They are hardly planted, They are hardly sown, Their stem has hardly taken root in the earth, And they are blown on and dry up, And the wind carries them away like stubble.
25 “To whom can you liken me to make me his equal?” says the Holy One.
26 “Lift up your eyes to heaven and see. Who has created these things? It is the One who brings out their army by number; He calls them all by name. Because of his vast dynamic energy and his awe-inspiring power, Not one of them is missing.
27 Why do you say, O Jacob, and why do you declare, O Israel, ‘My way is hidden from Jehovah, And I receive no justice from God’?
28 Do you not know? Have you not heard? Jehovah, the Creator of the ends of the earth, is a God for all eternity. He never tires out or grows weary. His understanding is unsearchable.
29 He gives power to the tired one And full might to those lacking strength.
30 Boys will tire out and grow weary, And young men will stumble and fall,
31 But those hoping in Jehovah will regain power. They will soar on wings like eagles. They will run and not grow weary; They will walk and not tire out.”
41 “Listen to me in silence, you islands; Let the nations regain their strength. Let them approach; then let them speak. Let us come together for judgment.
2 Who has raised up someone from the sunrise, Calling him in righteousness to His feet, To hand over nations to him And to make him subdue kings? Who reduces them to dust before his sword, Like windblown stubble before his bow?
3 He pursues them, passing along unhindered Over paths that his feet have not traveled.
4 Who has acted and done this, Summoning the generations from the beginning? I, Jehovah, am the First One; And with the last ones I am the same.”
5 The islands have seen it and have become afraid. The ends of the earth began to tremble. They draw near and come forward.
6 Each one helps his companion And says to his brother: “Be strong.”
7 So the craftsman strengthens the metalworker; The one who flattens with the forge hammer Strengthens the one hammering at the anvil. He says about the soldering: “It is good.” Then it is fastened with nails so that it will not topple over.
8 “But you, O Israel, are my servant, You, O Jacob, whom I have chosen, The offspring of Abraham my friend,
9 You, whom I took from the ends of the earth, And you, whom I called from its most distant parts. I said to you, ‘You are my servant; I have chosen you; I have not rejected you.
10 Do not be afraid, for I am with you. Do not be anxious, for I am your God. I will fortify you, yes, I will help you, I will really hold on to you with my right hand of righteousness.’
11 Look! All those getting enraged against you will be put to shame and humiliated. Those who fight with you will be brought to nothing and perish.
12 You will search for men who struggle with you, but you will not find them; The men at war with you will become as something nonexistent, as nothing at all.
13 For I, Jehovah your God, am grasping your right hand, The One saying to you, ‘Do not be afraid. I will help you.’
14 Do not be afraid, you worm Jacob, You men of Israel, I will help you,” declares Jehovah, your Repurchaser, the Holy One of Israel.
15 “Look! I have made you a threshing sledge, A new threshing instrument with double-edged teeth. You will tread down the mountains and crush them And make the hills like chaff.
16 You will winnow them, And the wind will carry them away; A windstorm will scatter them. You will be joyful in Jehovah, And you will boast in the Holy One of Israel.”
17 “The needy and the poor are seeking water, but there is none. Their tongue is dry from thirst. I, Jehovah, will answer them. I, the God of Israel, will not abandon them.
18 I will make rivers flow on the bare hills And springs in the valley plains. I will turn the wilderness into a reedy pool of water And the waterless land into springs of water.
19 In the desert I will plant the cedar tree, The acacia and the myrtle and the pine tree. In the desert plain I will plant the juniper tree, Together with the ash and the cypress tree,
20 So that all people may see and know And pay attention and understand That the hand of Jehovah has done this, And the Holy One of Israel has created it.”
21 “Present your case,” says Jehovah. “Produce your arguments,” says the King of Jacob.
22 “Produce evidence and tell us the things that will happen. Do tell us about the former things, So that we may reflect on them and know their outcome. Or declare to us the things that are coming.
23 Tell us what will happen in the future, So that we may know that you are gods. Yes, do something, good or bad, So that we may be amazed when we see it.
24 Look! You are something nonexistent, And your achievement is nothing. Anyone who chooses you is detestable.
25 I have raised up someone from the north, and he will come, One from the rising of the sun who will call on my name. He will trample rulers as if they were clay, Like a potter who treads moist clay.
26 Who told about this from the beginning, so that we could know, Or from times past, so that we could say, ‘He is right’? Indeed, no one announced it! No one declared it! No one heard anything from you!”
27 I was the first to say to Zion: “Look! Here they are!” And to Jerusalem I will send a bearer of good news.
28 But I kept looking, and there was no one; There was not one among them to give advice. And I kept asking them to reply.
29 Look! All of them are a delusion. Their works are nothing. Their metal images are wind and unreality.
42 Look! My servant, whom I support! My chosen one, whom I have approved! I have put my spirit in him; He will bring justice to the nations.
2 He will not cry out or raise his voice, And he will not make his voice heard in the street.
3 No crushed reed will he break, And no smoldering wick will he extinguish. In faithfulness he will bring justice.
4 He will not grow dim or be crushed until he establishes justice in the earth; And the islands keep waiting for his law.
5 This is what the true God, Jehovah, says, The Creator of the heavens and the Grand One who stretched them out, The One who spread out the earth and its produce, The One who gives breath to the people on it And spirit to those who walk on it:
6 “I, Jehovah, have called you in righteousness; I have taken hold of your hand. I will safeguard you and give you as a covenant for the people And as a light of the nations,
7 For you to open the blind eyes, To bring the prisoner out of the dungeon And those sitting in darkness out of the prison.
8 I am Jehovah. That is my name; I give my glory to no one else, Nor my praise to graven images.
9 See, the first things have come to pass; Now I am declaring new things. Before they spring up, I tell you about them.”
10 Sing to Jehovah a new song, His praise from the ends of the earth, You who go down to the sea and all that fills it, You islands and their inhabitants.
11 Let the wilderness and its cities raise their voice, The settlements where Keʹdar dwells. Let the inhabitants of the crag shout joyfully; Let them cry out from the top of the mountains.
12 Let them attribute glory to Jehovah And declare his praise in the islands.
13 Jehovah will go out like a mighty man. He will awaken his zeal like a warrior. He will shout, yes, he will let out a war cry; He will show himself mightier than his enemies.
14 “I have kept quiet for a long time. I remained silent and restrained myself. Like a woman giving birth, I will groan, pant, and gasp all at once.
15 I will devastate mountains and hills And dry up all their vegetation. I will turn rivers into islands And dry up reedy pools of water.
16 I will lead the blind in a way that they do not know And cause them to tread on unfamiliar paths. I will turn the darkness before them into light And turn the rugged terrain into level land. This is what I will do for them, and I will not abandon them.”
17 They will be turned back and will be utterly put to shame, Those who trust in carved images, Those who say to metal statues: “You are our gods.”
18 Listen, you who are deaf; Look and see, you who are blind.
19 Who is blind except my servant, So deaf as the messenger I send? Who is so blind as the one rewarded, So blind as the servant of Jehovah?
20 You see many things, but you do not keep watch. You open your ears, but you do not listen.
21 For the sake of his righteousness, Jehovah has taken pleasure in magnifying the law and making it glorious.
22 But this is a people plundered and pillaged; All of them are trapped in the holes and hidden in the prisons. They have been plundered with no one to rescue them, And pillaged with no one to say: “Bring them back!”
23 Who among you will hear this? Who will pay attention and listen for the time to come?
24 Who has given Jacob for pillage And Israel to the plunderers? Is it not Jehovah, the One against whom we sinned? In His ways they refused to walk, And His law they would not obey.
25 So He kept pouring out on him wrath, His anger and the fury of war. It consumed everything around him, but he paid no attention. It blazed up against him, but he would not take it to heart.
43 Now this is what Jehovah says, Your Creator, O Jacob, the One who formed you, O Israel: “Do not be afraid, for I have repurchased you. I have called you by your name. You belong to me.
2 When you pass through the waters, I will be with you, And through the rivers, they will not flood over you. When you walk through the fire, you will not be scorched, Nor will the flame singe you.
3 For I am Jehovah your God, The Holy One of Israel, your Savior. I have given Egypt as a ransom for you, E·thi·oʹpi·a and Seʹba in exchange for you.
4 For you became precious in my eyes, You were honored, and I have loved you. So I will give people in place of you And nations in exchange for your life.
5 Do not be afraid, for I am with you. I will bring your offspring from the east And gather you together from the west.
6 I will say to the north, ‘Give them up!’ And to the south, ‘Do not hold them back. Bring my sons from afar, and my daughters from the ends of the earth,
7 Everyone who is called by my name And whom I created for my own glory, Whom I have formed and made.’
8 Bring out a people who are blind, though they have eyes, And who are deaf, though they have ears.
9 Let all the nations assemble in one place, And let the peoples be gathered together. Who among them can tell this? Or can they cause us to hear the first things? Let them present their witnesses to prove themselves right, Or let them hear and say, ‘It is the truth!’”
10 “You are my witnesses,” declares Jehovah, “Yes, my servant whom I have chosen, So that you may know and have faith in me And understand that I am the same One. Before me no God was formed, And after me there has been none.
11 I—I am Jehovah, and besides me there is no savior.”
12 “I am the One who declared and saved and made known When there was no foreign god among you. So you are my witnesses,” declares Jehovah, “and I am God.
13 Also, I am always the same One; And no one can snatch anything out of my hand. When I act, who can prevent it?”
14 This is what Jehovah says, your Repurchaser, the Holy One of Israel: “For your sakes I will send to Babylon and bring down all the bars of the gates, And the Chal·deʹans, in their ships, will cry out in distress.
15 I am Jehovah, your Holy One, the Creator of Israel, your King.”
16 This is what Jehovah says, The One making a way through the sea And a path even through turbulent waters,
17 The One who draws out the war chariot and the horse, The army together with the mighty warriors: “They will lie down and not get up. They will be extinguished, snuffed out like a burning wick.”
18 “Do not remember the former things, And do not dwell on the past.
19 Look! I am doing something new; Even now it is springing up. Do you not recognize it? I will make a way through the wilderness And rivers through the desert.
20 The wild beast of the field will honor me, The jackals and the ostriches, For I provide water in the wilderness, Rivers in the desert, For my people, my chosen one, to drink,
21 The people whom I formed for myself So that they might declare my praise.
22 But you have not called on me, O Jacob, Because you grew weary of me, O Israel.
23 You have not brought me sheep for your whole burnt offerings Or glorified me with your sacrifices. I have not compelled you to bring me a gift, Nor have I made you weary by demanding frankincense.
24 You did not buy me sweet cane with your money, And with the fat of your sacrifices you did not satisfy me. Instead, you have burdened me with your sins And made me weary with your errors.
25 I, I am the One who is blotting out your transgressions for my own sake, And I will not remember your sins.
26 Remind me; let us bring our case against each other; Tell your side of it to prove you are in the right.
27 Your first forefather sinned, And your own spokesmen have rebelled against me.
28 So I will profane the princes of the holy place, And I will give Jacob over to destruction And subject Israel to insulting words.
44 “Now listen, O Jacob my servant, And you, O Israel, whom I have chosen.
2 This is what Jehovah says, Your Maker and the One who formed you, Who has helped you from the womb: ‘Do not be afraid, my servant Jacob, And you, Jeshʹu·run, whom I have chosen.
3 For I will pour out water on the thirsty one And flowing streams on the dry ground. I will pour out my spirit on your offspring And my blessing on your descendants.
4 And they will spring up as among the green grass, Like poplars by the streams of water.
5 One will say: “I belong to Jehovah.” Another will call himself by the name of Jacob, And yet another will write on his hand: “Belonging to Jehovah.” And he will adopt the name of Israel.’
6 This is what Jehovah says, The King of Israel and his Repurchaser, Jehovah of armies: ‘I am the first and I am the last. There is no God but me.
7 Who is there like me? Let him call out and tell it and prove it to me! From the time I established the people of long ago, Let them tell both the things to come And what will yet happen.
8 Do not be in dread, And do not become paralyzed with fear. Have I not told each of you beforehand and declared it? You are my witnesses. Is there any God but me? No, there is no other Rock; I know of none.’”
9 All who form carved images amount to nothing, And their cherished objects will be of no benefit. As their witnesses, they see nothing and know nothing, So those who made them will be put to shame.
10 Who would form a god or cast a metal image That can bring no benefit?
11 Look! All his associates will be put to shame! The craftsmen are mere humans. Let them all assemble and take their stand. They will be terrified and be put to shame together.
12 The metalsmith works the iron over the coals with his tool. He forms it with hammers, Working it with his powerful arm. Then he grows hungry and his strength fails; He drinks no water and grows tired.
13 The wood-carver stretches the measuring line, tracing out the pattern with red chalk. He works it with a wood scraper and traces it with a compass. He patterns it after a man, With the beauty of a man, To sit in a house.
14 There is one whose work is to cut down cedars. He selects a certain type of tree, an oak, And he lets it grow strong among the trees of the forest. He plants a laurel tree, and the rain makes it grow.
15 Then it becomes fuel for a man to make fires. He takes part of it to warm himself; He builds a fire and bakes bread. But he also makes a god and worships it. He makes it into a carved image, and he bows down before it.
16 Half of it he burns up in a fire; With that half he roasts the meat that he eats, and he is satisfied. He also warms himself and says: “Ah! I am warm as I watch the fire.”
17 But the rest of it he makes into a god, into his carved image. He bows down to it and worships it. He prays to it and says: “Save me, for you are my god.”
18 They know nothing, they understand nothing, Because their eyes are sealed shut and they cannot see, And their heart has no insight.
19 No one reflects in his heart Or has knowledge or understanding, saying: “Half of it I burned up in a fire, And on its coals I baked bread and roasted meat to eat. Should I, then, make the rest of it into a detestable thing? Should I worship a block of wood from a tree?”
20 He feeds on ashes. His own deluded heart has led him astray. He cannot save himself, nor does he say: “Is there not a lie in my right hand?”
21 “Remember these things, O Jacob, and you, O Israel, For you are my servant. I formed you, and you are my servant. O Israel, I will not forget you.
22 I will blot out your transgressions as with a cloud And your sins as with a thick cloud. Return to me, for I will repurchase you.
23 Shout joyfully, you heavens, For Jehovah has acted! Shout in triumph, you depths of the earth! Shout for joy, you mountains, You forest, and all your trees! For Jehovah has repurchased Jacob, And on Israel he displays his splendor.”
24 This is what Jehovah says, your Repurchaser, Who formed you since you were in the womb: “I am Jehovah, who made everything. I stretched out the heavens by myself, And I spread out the earth. Who was with me?
25 I am frustrating the signs of the empty talkers, And I am the One who makes diviners act like fools; The One confounding the wise men And turning their knowledge into foolishness;
26 The One making the word of his servant come true And completely fulfilling the predictions of his messengers; The One saying of Jerusalem, ‘She will be inhabited,’ And of the cities of Judah, ‘They will be rebuilt, And I will restore her ruins’;
27 The One saying to the deep waters, ‘Be evaporated, And I will dry up all your rivers’;
28 The One saying of Cyrus, ‘He is my shepherd, And he will completely carry out all my will’; The One saying of Jerusalem, ‘She will be rebuilt,’ And of the temple, ‘Your foundation will be laid.’”
45 This is what Jehovah says to his anointed one, to Cyrus, Whose right hand I have taken hold of To subdue nations before him, To disarm kings, To open before him the double doors, So that the gates will not be shut:
2 “Before you I will go, And the hills I will level. The copper doors I will break in pieces, And the iron bars I will cut down.
3 I will give you the treasures in the darkness And the hidden treasures in the concealed places, So that you may know that I am Jehovah, The God of Israel, who is calling you by your name.
4 For the sake of my servant Jacob and of Israel my chosen one, I am calling you by your name. I am giving you a name of honor, although you did not know me.
5 I am Jehovah, and there is no one else. There is no God except me. I will strengthen you, although you did not know me,
6 In order that people may know From the rising of the sun to its setting That there is none besides me. I am Jehovah, and there is no one else.
7 I form light and create darkness, I make peace and create calamity; I, Jehovah, am doing all these things.
8 You heavens, rain down from above; Let the clouds pour down righteousness. Let the earth open up and be fruitful with salvation, And let it cause righteousness to spring up at the same time. I, Jehovah, have created it.”
9 Woe to the one who contends with his Maker, For he is just an earthenware fragment Among the other earthenware fragments lying on the ground! Should the clay say to the Potter: “What are you making?” Or should your work say: “He has no hands”?
10 Woe to the one who says to a father: “What do you become father to?” And to a woman: “What are you giving birth to?”
11 This is what Jehovah says, the Holy One of Israel, the One who formed him: “Would you question me about the things coming And command me about my sons and the works of my hands?
12 I made the earth and created man on it. I stretched out the heavens with my own hands, And I give orders to all their army.”
13 “I have raised up a man in righteousness, And I will make all his ways straight. He is the one who will build my city And set my exiles free without a price or a bribe,” says Jehovah of armies.
14 This is what Jehovah says: “The profit of Egypt and the merchandise of E·thi·oʹpi·a and the Sa·beʹans, tall of stature, Will come over to you and become yours. They will walk behind you in chains. They will come over and bow down to you. To you they will say in prayer, ‘Surely God is with you, And there is no one else; there is no other God.’”
15 Truly you are a God who conceals himself, O God of Israel, the Savior.
16 They will all be put to shame and be humiliated; The makers of idols will all go off in disgrace.
17 But Israel will be saved by Jehovah with an everlasting salvation. You will not be put to shame or disgraced for all eternity.
18 For this is what Jehovah says, The Creator of the heavens, the true God, The One who formed the earth, its Maker who firmly established it, Who did not create it simply for nothing, but formed it to be inhabited: “I am Jehovah, and there is no one else.
19 I did not speak in a concealed place, in a land of darkness; I did not say to the offspring of Jacob, ‘Seek me simply for nothing.’ I am Jehovah, who speaks what is righteous and declares what is upright.
20 Gather together and come. Approach together, you escapees from the nations. They know nothing, those who carry around carved images And pray to a god that cannot save them.
21 Make your report, present your case. Let them consult together in unity. Who foretold this long ago And declared it from times past? Is it not I, Jehovah? There is no other God but me; A righteous God and a Savior, there is none besides me.
22 Turn to me and be saved, all the ends of the earth, For I am God, and there is no one else.
23 By myself I have sworn; The word has gone out of my mouth in righteousness, And it will not return: To me every knee will bend, Every tongue will swear loyalty
24 And say, ‘Surely in Jehovah are true righteousness and strength. All those enraged against him will come before him in shame.
25 In Jehovah all the offspring of Israel will prove to be right, And in him they will make their boast.’”
46 Bel bends down, Neʹbo stoops over. Their idols are loaded on animals, on beasts of burden, Like baggage that burdens the weary animals.
2 They stoop and bend down together; They cannot rescue the loads, And they themselves go into captivity.
3 “Listen to me, O house of Jacob, and all you who remain of the house of Israel, You whom I have supported from birth and carried from the womb.
4 Until you grow old I will be the same; Until your hair is gray I will keep bearing you. As I have done, I will carry you and bear you and rescue you.
5 To whom will you liken me or make me equal or compare me, So that we should resemble each other?
6 There are those who lavish gold from their purse; They weigh out the silver on the scale. They hire a metalworker, and he makes it into a god. Then they prostrate themselves, yes, they worship it.
7 They lift it to their shoulders; They carry it and put it in its place, and it just stands there. It does not move from its place. They cry out to it, but it does not answer; It cannot rescue anyone from distress.
8 Remember this, and take courage. Take it to heart, you transgressors.
9 Remember the former things of long ago, That I am God, and there is no other. I am God, and there is no one like me.
10 From the beginning I foretell the outcome, And from long ago the things that have not yet been done. I say, ‘My decision will stand, And I will do whatever I please.’
11 I am calling a bird of prey from the sunrise, From a distant land the man to carry out my decision. I have spoken, and I will bring it about. I have purposed it, and I will also carry it out.
12 Listen to me, you who are stubborn of heart, You who are far away from righteousness.
13 I have brought my righteousness near; It is not far away, And my salvation will not delay. I will grant salvation in Zion, my splendor to Israel.”
47 Come down and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon. Sit down on the ground where there is no throne, O daughter of the Chal·deʹans, For never again will people call you delicate and pampered.
2 Take a hand mill and grind flour. Remove your veil. Strip off your skirt, uncover your legs. Cross over the rivers.
3 Your nakedness will be uncovered. Your shame will be exposed. I will take vengeance, and no man will stand in my way.
4 “The One repurchasing us —Jehovah of armies is his name— Is the Holy One of Israel.”
5 Sit there silently and go into darkness, O daughter of the Chal·deʹans; No more will they call you Mistress of Kingdoms.
6 I grew indignant at my people. I profaned my inheritance, And I gave them into your hand. But you showed them no mercy. Even on the elderly you placed a heavy yoke.
7 You said: “I will always be the Mistress, forever.” You did not take these things to heart; You did not consider how the matter would end.
8 Now hear this, O lover of pleasure, Who sits in security, who says in her heart: “I am the one, and there is no one else. I will not become a widow. I will never know the loss of children.”
9 But these two things will come upon you suddenly, in one day: Loss of children and widowhood. In full measure they will come upon you Because of your many sorceries and all your powerful spells.
10 You trusted in your wickedness. You said: “No one sees me.” Your wisdom and knowledge are what led you astray, And you say in your heart: “I am the one, and there is no one else.”
11 But calamity will come upon you, And none of your charms will stop it. Adversity will befall you; you will not be able to avert it. Sudden ruin will come upon you like you have never known.
12 Go ahead, then, with your spells and your many sorceries, With which you have toiled from your youth. Perhaps you may be able to benefit; Perhaps you may strike people with awe.
13 You have grown weary with the multitude of your advisers. Let them stand up now and save you, Those who worship the heavens, who gaze at the stars, Those giving out knowledge at the new moons About the things that will come upon you.
14 Look! They are like stubble. A fire will burn them up. They cannot save themselves from the power of the flame. These are not charcoals for keeping warm, And this is not a fire to sit in front of.
15 So your charmers will become to you, Those with whom you toiled from your youth. They will wander, each one in his own direction. There will be no one to save you.
48 Hear this, O house of Jacob, You who call yourselves by the name of Israel And who have come from the waters of Judah, You who swear by the name of Jehovah And who call on the God of Israel, Though not in truth and righteousness.
2 For they call themselves after the holy city And seek the support of the God of Israel, Whose name is Jehovah of armies.
3 “The former things I told you long ago. From my own mouth they went out, And I made them known. Suddenly I took action, and they came about.
4 Because I knew how stubborn you are —That your neck is an iron sinew and your forehead is copper—
5 I told you long ago. Before it came about, I caused you to hear it, So that you could not say, ‘My idol did this; My carved image and my metal image commanded this.’
6 You have heard and seen all of this. Will you not declare it? From now on I am announcing new things to you, Guarded secrets that you have not known.
7 Only now are they being created, and not long ago, Things that you never heard before today, So that you cannot say, ‘Look! I already know them.’
8 No, you have not heard, you have not known, And in the past your ears were not opened. For I know that you are very treacherous, And you have been called a transgressor from birth.
9 But for the sake of my name I will hold back my anger; For my own praise I will restrain myself toward you, And I will not do away with you.
10 Look! I have refined you, but not in the form of silver. I have tested you in the smelting furnace of affliction.
11 For my own sake, for my own sake I will act, For how could I let myself be profaned? I give my glory to no one else.
12 Listen to me, O Jacob, and Israel, whom I have called. I am the same One. I am the first; I am also the last.
13 My own hand laid the foundation of the earth, And my right hand spread out the heavens. When I call to them, they stand up together.
14 Gather together, all of you, and listen. Who among them has announced these things? Jehovah has loved him. He will carry out his delight against Babylon, And his arm will come against the Chal·deʹans.
15 I myself have spoken, and I have called him. I have brought him, and his way will be successful.
16 Come near to me, and hear this. From the very start I have not spoken in secret. From the time it happened I was there.” And now the Sovereign Lord Jehovah has sent me, and his spirit.
17 This is what Jehovah says, your Repurchaser, the Holy One of Israel: “I, Jehovah, am your God, The One teaching you to benefit yourself, The One guiding you in the way you should walk.
18 If only you would pay attention to my commandments! Then your peace would become just like a river And your righteousness like the waves of the sea.
19 Your offspring would be as many as the sand And your descendants as its grains. Their name would never be cut off or annihilated from before me.”
20 Go out from Babylon! Flee from the Chal·deʹans! Announce it with a joyful cry! Proclaim it! Make it known to the ends of the earth. Say: “Jehovah has repurchased his servant Jacob.
21 They did not become thirsty when he led them through devastated places. He caused water to flow out of the rock for them; He split a rock and made water gush out.”
22 “There is no peace,” says Jehovah, “for the wicked.”
49 Listen to me, you islands, And pay attention, you faraway nations. Jehovah has called me before I was born. From the time I was in my mother’s womb he has made mention of my name.
2 He made my mouth like a sharp sword; He has hidden me in the shadow of his hand. He made me a polished arrow; He concealed me in his quiver.
3 He said to me: “You are my servant, O Israel, Through whom I will show my splendor.”
4 But I said: “I have toiled for nothing. I used up my strength for an unreality, in vain. But surely my judgment is with Jehovah, And my wages with my God.”
5 And now Jehovah, the One who formed me from the womb as his servant, Has said for me to bring Jacob back to him, So that Israel may be gathered to him. I will be glorified in the eyes of Jehovah, And my God will have become my strength.
6 And he said: “It is not enough that you are my servant To raise up the tribes of Jacob And to bring back those who were preserved of Israel. I have also given you as a light of nations, So that my salvation may reach the ends of the earth.”
7 This is what Jehovah, the Repurchaser of Israel, his Holy One, says to the one who is despised, to the one who is detested by the nation, to the servant of rulers: “Kings will see and rise up, And princes will bow down Because of Jehovah, who is faithful, The Holy One of Israel, who has chosen you.”
8 This is what Jehovah says: “In a time of favor I answered you, And in a day of salvation I helped you; I kept safeguarding you to give you as a covenant for the people, To rehabilitate the land, To cause them to possess their desolate inheritances,
9 To say to the prisoners, ‘Come out!’ And to those in the darkness, ‘Show yourselves!’ By the roadways they will feed, Along all the worn paths will be their pastures.
10 They will not go hungry, nor will they thirst, Nor will scorching heat or the sun beat down on them. For the One who has mercy on them will lead them, And he will guide them by the springs of water.
11 I will make all my mountains into a road, And my highways will be raised up.
12 Look! These are coming from far away, And look! these from the north and from the west, And these from the land of Siʹnim.”
13 Shout for joy, you heavens, and rejoice, you earth. Let the mountains become cheerful with a joyful cry. For Jehovah has comforted his people, And he shows mercy to his own afflicted ones.
14 But Zion kept saying: “Jehovah has abandoned me, and Jehovah has forgotten me.”
15 Can a woman forget her nursing child Or have no compassion for the son of her womb? Even if these women forget, I would never forget you.
16 Look! On my palms I have engraved you. Your walls are always before me.
17 Your sons hurry back. Those who tore you down and devastated you will depart from you.
18 Raise your eyes and look all around. They are all gathering together. They are coming to you. “As surely as I am living,” declares Jehovah, “You will clothe yourself with all of them as with ornaments, And you will fasten them on yourself as a bride does.
19 Although your places were devastated and desolate and your land was in ruins, Now it will become too cramped for those dwelling there, And those who swallowed you down will be far away.
20 The sons born when you were bereaved will say in your hearing, ‘This place is too cramped for me. Make room for me to dwell here.’
21 And you will say in your heart, ‘Who has fathered these for me, Since I am a woman bereaved of children and barren, Exiled and taken prisoner? Who has raised these? Look! I was left all alone, So where have these come from?’”
22 This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Look! I will raise up my hand to the nations, And I will lift up my signal to the peoples. They will bring your sons in their arms And carry your daughters on their shoulders.
23 Kings will become caretakers for you, And their princesses will be your nurses. They will bow down to you with their faces to the ground And lick the dust of your feet, And you will have to know that I am Jehovah; Those hoping in me will not be put to shame.”
24 Can those already captured be taken from a mighty man, Or can the captives of the tyrant be rescued?
25 But this is what Jehovah says: “Even the captives of a mighty man will be taken away, And those captured by the tyrant will be rescued. I will oppose those who oppose you, And I will save your own sons.
26 I will make those who mistreat you eat their own flesh, And as with sweet wine, they will become drunk with their own blood. And all people will have to know that I am Jehovah, Your Savior and your Repurchaser, The Powerful One of Jacob.”
50 This is what Jehovah says: “Where is the divorce certificate of your mother, whom I sent away? Or to which of my creditors did I sell you? Look! It was because of your own errors you were sold, And because of your own transgressions your mother was sent away.
2 Why, then, was no one here when I came? Why did no one answer when I called? Is my hand too short to redeem, Or is there no power in me to rescue? Look! With my rebuke I dry up the sea; I make rivers a desert. Their fish rot for lack of water, And they die because of thirst.
3 I clothe the heavens with gloom, And I make sackcloth their covering.”
4 The Sovereign Lord Jehovah has given me the tongue of those taught, So that I may know how to answer the tired one with the right word. He awakens me morning by morning; He awakens my ear to listen like the taught ones.
5 The Sovereign Lord Jehovah has opened my ear, And I was not rebellious. I did not turn in the opposite direction.
6 I offered my back to those striking me And my cheeks to those who plucked them bare. I did not hide my face from humiliating things and from spit.
7 But the Sovereign Lord Jehovah will help me. That is why I will not feel humiliated. That is why I have set my face like a flint, And I know that I will not be put to shame.
8 The One who declares me righteous is near. Who can accuse me? Let us stand up together. Who has a case against me? Let him approach me.
9 Look! The Sovereign Lord Jehovah will help me. Who will pronounce me guilty? Look! They will all wear out like a garment. A moth will eat them up.
10 Who among you fears Jehovah And listens to the voice of his servant? Who has walked in deep darkness, without any brightness? Let him trust in the name of Jehovah and support himself on his God.
11 “Look! All of you who are igniting a fire, Making sparks fly, Walk in the light of your fire, Among the sparks you have set ablaze. This is what you will have from my hand: In sheer pain you will lie down.
51 “Listen to me, you who are pursuing righteousness, You who are seeking Jehovah. Look to the rock from which you were hewn And to the quarry from which you were dug.
2 Look to Abraham your father And to Sarah who gave birth to you. For he was only one when I called him, And I blessed him and made him many.
3 For Jehovah will comfort Zion. He will bring comfort to all her ruins, And he will make her wilderness like Eʹden And her desert plain like the garden of Jehovah. Exultation and rejoicing will be found in her, Thanksgiving and melodious song.
4 Pay attention to me, O my people, And give ear to me, my nation. For a law will go out from me, And my justice I will establish as a light to the peoples.
5 My righteousness draws near. My salvation will go out, And my arms will judge the peoples. In me the islands will hope, And for my arm they will wait.
6 Raise your eyes to the heavens, And look at the earth below. For the heavens will disperse in fragments like smoke; The earth will wear out like a garment, And its inhabitants will die like gnats. But my salvation will be eternal, And my righteousness will never fail.
7 Listen to me, you who know righteousness, The people with my law in their heart. Do not be afraid of the taunts of mortal men, And do not be terrified because of their insults.
8 For a moth will eat them up just like a garment; The clothes moth will devour them like wool. But my righteousness will last forever, And my salvation for all generations.”
9 Awake! Awake! Clothe yourself with strength, O arm of Jehovah! Awake as in the days of long ago, as in past generations. Was it not you who broke Raʹhab to pieces, Who pierced the sea monster?
10 Are you not the one who dried up the sea, the waters of the vast deep? The one who made the depths of the sea a roadway for the repurchased ones to cross?
11 The redeemed ones of Jehovah will return. They will come to Zion with a joyful cry, And unending joy will crown them. Exultation and rejoicing will be theirs, And grief and sighing will flee away.
12 “I myself am the One comforting you. Why should you be afraid of a mortal man who will die And of a son of man who will wither like green grass?
13 Why do you forget Jehovah your Maker, The One who stretched out the heavens and laid the foundation of the earth? And all day long you were in constant fear of the rage of the oppressor, As though he were in a position to bring you to ruin. Where, now, is the rage of the oppressor?
14 The one bent over in chains will soon be set free; He will not die and go into the pit, Nor will his bread be lacking.
15 But I am Jehovah your God, Who stirs up the sea and makes its waves boisterous —Jehovah of armies is his name.
16 I will put my words in your mouth, And with the shadow of my hand I will cover you, In order to plant the heavens and to lay the foundation of the earth And to say to Zion, ‘You are my people.’
17 Awake! Awake! Rise up, O Jerusalem, You who have drunk from the hand of Jehovah his cup of wrath. You have drunk the goblet; You have drained out the cup causing staggering.
18 Not one of all the sons whom she bore is there to guide her, And not one of all the sons whom she raised has taken hold of her hand.
19 These two things have befallen you. Who will sympathize with you? Destruction and devastation, hunger and sword! Who will comfort you?
20 Your sons have fainted. They lie down at every street corner Like wild sheep in the net. They are full of the wrath of Jehovah, the rebuke of your God.”
21 So please listen to this, O woman afflicted and drunk, though not with wine.
22 This is what your Lord Jehovah says, your God who defends his people: “Look! I will take from your hand the cup causing staggering, The goblet, my cup of wrath; You will never drink it again.
23 I will put it into the hand of your tormentors, Those who said to you, ‘Bow down so that we may walk over you!’ So you made your back like the ground, Like a street for them to walk on.”
52 Awake! Awake! Clothe yourself with strength, O Zion! Put on your beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city! For no more will the uncircumcised and unclean one enter into you.
2 Shake off the dust, rise and take a seat, O Jerusalem. Loosen the bonds on your neck, O captive daughter of Zion.
3 For this is what Jehovah says: “You were sold for nothing, And without money you will be repurchased.”
4 For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “At first my people went down to Egypt to live there as foreigners; Then As·syrʹi·a oppressed them without cause.”
5 “What, then, should I do here?” declares Jehovah. “For my people were taken for nothing. Those ruling over them keep howling in triumph,” declares Jehovah, “And constantly, all day long, my name is treated with disrespect.
6 For that reason my people will know my name; For that reason they will know in that day that I am the One speaking. Look, it is I!”
7 How beautiful on the mountains are the feet of the one bringing good news, The one proclaiming peace, The one bringing good news of something better, The one proclaiming salvation, The one saying to Zion: “Your God has become King!”
8 Listen! Your watchmen raise their voice. In unison they shout joyfully, For they will see it clearly when Jehovah gathers back Zion.
9 Become cheerful, shout joyfully in unison, you ruins of Jerusalem, For Jehovah has comforted his people; he has repurchased Jerusalem.
10 Jehovah has bared his holy arm before the eyes of all the nations; All the ends of the earth will see the acts of salvation of our God.
11 Turn away, turn away, get out of there, touch nothing unclean! Get out from the midst of her, keep yourselves clean, You who are carrying the utensils of Jehovah.
12 For you will not depart in panic, Nor will you have to flee, For Jehovah will go ahead of you, And the God of Israel will be your rear guard.
13 Look! My servant will act with insight. He will be raised up high, He will be elevated and greatly exalted.
14 Just as there were many who stared at him in amazement —For his appearance was disfigured more than that of any other man And his stately form more than that of mankind—
15 So he will startle many nations. Kings will shut their mouths before him, Because they will see what they had not been told And give consideration to what they had not heard.
53 Who has put faith in the thing heard from us? And as for the arm of Jehovah, to whom has it been revealed?
2 He will come up like a twig before him, like a root out of parched land. No stately form does he have, nor any splendor; And when we see him, his appearance does not draw us to him.
3 He was despised and was avoided by men, A man who was meant for pains and was familiar with sickness. It was as if his face were hidden from us. He was despised, and we held him as of no account.
4 Truly he himself carried our sicknesses, And he bore our pains. But we considered him as plagued, stricken by God and afflicted.
5 But he was pierced for our transgression; He was crushed for our errors. He bore the punishment for our peace, And because of his wounds we were healed.
6 Like sheep we have all wandered about, Each has turned his own way, And Jehovah has caused the error of us all to meet up with him.
7 He was oppressed and he let himself be afflicted, But he would not open his mouth. He was brought like a sheep to the slaughter, Like a ewe that is silent before its shearers, And he would not open his mouth.
8 Because of restraint and judgment he was taken away; And who will concern himself with the details of his generation? For he was cut off from the land of the living; Because of the transgression of my people he received the stroke.
9 And he was given a burial place with the wicked, And with the rich in his death, Although he had done no wrong And there was no deception in his mouth.
10 But it was Jehovah’s will to crush him, and he let him become sick. If you will present his life as a guilt offering, He will see his offspring, he will prolong his days, And through him the delight of Jehovah will have success.
11 Because of his anguish, he will see and be satisfied. By means of his knowledge the righteous one, my servant, Will bring a righteous standing to many people, And their errors he will bear.
12 For that reason I will assign him a portion among the many, And he will apportion the spoil with the mighty, Because he poured out his life even to death And was counted among the transgressors; He carried the sin of many people, And he interceded for the transgressors.
54 “Shout joyfully, you barren woman who has not given birth! Become cheerful and cry out for joy, you who never had birth pains, For the sons of the desolate one are more numerous Than the sons of the woman with a husband,” says Jehovah.
2 “Make the place of your tent more spacious. Stretch out the tent cloths of your grand tabernacle. Do not hold back, lengthen your tent cords, And make your tent pins strong.
3 For you will spread out to the right and to the left. Your offspring will take possession of nations, And they will inhabit the desolated cities.
4 Do not be afraid, for you will not be put to shame; And do not feel humiliated, for you will not be disappointed. For you will forget the shame of your youth, And the disgrace of your widowhood you will remember no more.”
5 “For your Grand Maker is as your husband, Jehovah of armies is his name, And the Holy One of Israel is your Repurchaser. He will be called the God of the whole earth.
6 For Jehovah called you as if you were an abandoned wife and grief-stricken, Like a wife married in youth and then rejected,” says your God.
7 “For a brief moment I abandoned you, But with great mercy I will gather you back.
8 In a flood of indignation I hid my face from you for a moment, But with everlasting loyal love I will have mercy on you,” says your Repurchaser, Jehovah.
9 “This is like the days of Noah to me. Just as I have sworn that the waters of Noah will no more cover the earth, So I swear that I will no more become indignant toward you or rebuke you.
10 For the mountains may be removed And the hills may be shaken, But my loyal love will not be removed from you, Nor will my covenant of peace be shaken,” says Jehovah, the One having mercy on you.
11 “O afflicted woman, storm-tossed, uncomforted, I am laying your stones with hard mortar And your foundation with sapphires.
12 I will make your battlements of rubies, Your gates of sparkling stones, And all your boundaries of precious stones.
13 And all your sons will be taught by Jehovah, And the peace of your sons will be abundant.
14 You will be firmly established in righteousness. You will be far removed from oppression, You will fear nothing and have no cause for terror, For it will not come near you.
15 If anyone should attack you, It will not be at my orders. Whoever makes an attack on you will fall because of you.”
16 “Look! I myself created the craftsman, Who blows on the charcoal fire, And his work produces a weapon. I myself also created the destructive man to bring ruin.
17 No weapon formed against you will have any success, And you will condemn any tongue that rises up against you in the judgment. This is the heritage of the servants of Jehovah, And their righteousness is from me,” declares Jehovah.
55 Come, all you thirsty ones, come to the water! You with no money, come, buy and eat! Yes, come, buy wine and milk without money and without cost.
2 Why do you keep paying out money for what is not bread, And why spend your earnings for what brings no satisfaction? Listen intently to me, and eat what is good, And you will find great delight in what is truly rich.
3 Incline your ear and come to me. Listen, and you will keep alive, And I will readily make with you an everlasting covenant In harmony with the expressions of loyal love to David, which are faithful.
4 Look! I made him a witness to the nations, A leader and commander to the nations.
5 Look! You will call a nation that you do not know, And those of a nation who have not known you will run to you For the sake of Jehovah your God, the Holy One of Israel, Because he will glorify you.
6 Search for Jehovah while he may be found. Call to him while he is near.
7 Let the wicked man leave his way And the evil man his thoughts; Let him return to Jehovah, who will have mercy on him, To our God, for he will forgive in a large way.
8 “For my thoughts are not your thoughts, And your ways are not my ways,” declares Jehovah.
9 “For as the heavens are higher than the earth, So my ways are higher than your ways And my thoughts than your thoughts.
10 For just as the rain and the snow pour down from heaven And do not return there until they saturate the earth, making it produce and sprout, Giving seed to the sower and bread to the eater,
11 So my word that goes out of my mouth will be. It will not return to me without results, But it will certainly accomplish whatever is my delight, And it will have sure success in what I send it to do.
12 For you will go out with rejoicing, And in peace you will be brought back. The mountains and the hills will become cheerful before you with a joyful cry, And the trees of the field will all clap their hands.
13 Instead of thornbushes the juniper tree will grow, And instead of the stinging nettle the myrtle tree will grow. And it will bring fame to Jehovah, An everlasting sign that will never perish.”
56 This is what Jehovah says: “Uphold justice, and do what is righteous, For my salvation will soon come And my righteousness will be revealed.
2 Happy is the man who does this And the son of man who holds fast to it, Who keeps the Sabbath and does not profane it And who holds his hand back from any kind of evil.
3 The foreigner who joins himself to Jehovah should not say, ‘Jehovah will surely separate me from his people.’ And the eunuch should not say, ‘Look! I am a dried-up tree.’”
4 For this is what Jehovah says to the eunuchs who keep my sabbaths and who choose what I delight in and who hold fast to my covenant:
5 “I will give to them in my house and within my walls a monument and a name, Something better than sons and daughters. An everlasting name I will give them, One that will not perish.
6 As for the foreigners who join themselves to Jehovah to minister to him, To love the name of Jehovah And to be his servants, All those who keep the Sabbath and do not profane it And who hold fast to my covenant,
7 I will also bring them to my holy mountain And make them rejoice inside my house of prayer. Their whole burnt offerings and their sacrifices will be accepted on my altar. For my house will be called a house of prayer for all the peoples.”
8 The Sovereign Lord Jehovah, who is gathering the dispersed ones of Israel, declares: “I will gather to him others besides those already gathered.”
9 All you wild animals of the field, come to eat, All you wild animals in the forest.
10 His watchmen are blind, none of them have taken note. All of them are speechless dogs, unable to bark. They are panting and lying down; they love to slumber.
11 They are dogs with a voracious appetite; They are never satisfied. They are shepherds who have no understanding. They have all gone their own way; Every last one of them seeks his own dishonest gain and says:
12 “Come, let me take some wine, And let us drink our fill of alcohol. And tomorrow will be like today, only far better!”
57 The righteous one has perished, But no one takes it to heart. Loyal men are taken away, With no one discerning that the righteous one has been taken away Because of the calamity.
2 He enters into peace. They rest on their beds, all who walk uprightly.
3 “But as for you, come closer, You sons of a sorceress, You children of an adulterer and a prostitute:
4 Whom are you making fun of? Against whom do you open your mouth wide and stick out your tongue? Are you not the children of transgression, The children of deceit,
5 Those who are inflamed with passion among big trees, Under every luxuriant tree, Who slaughter the children in the valleys, Under the clefts of the crags?
6 With the smooth stones of the valley is your portion. Yes, these are your lot. Even to them you pour out drink offerings and offer gifts. Should I be satisfied with these things?
7 On a mountain high and lofty you prepared your bed, And you went up there to offer sacrifice.
8 Behind the door and the doorpost you set up your memorial. You left me and uncovered yourself; You went up and made your bed spacious. And you made a covenant with them. You loved sharing their bed, And you gazed at the male organ.
9 You went down to Melʹech with oil And with an abundance of perfume. You sent your envoys far off, So that you descended to the Grave.
10 You have toiled in following your many ways, But you did not say, ‘It is hopeless!’ You found renewed strength. That is why you do not give up.
11 Whom did you dread and fear So that you started to lie? You did not remember me. You took nothing to heart. Have I not kept silent and withdrawn? So you showed no fear of me.
12 I will make known your ‘righteousness’ and your works, And they will not benefit you.
13 When you cry for help, Your collection of idols will not rescue you. A wind will carry all of them away, A mere breath will blow them away, But the one who takes refuge in me will inherit the land And will take possession of my holy mountain.
14 It will be said, ‘Build up, build up a road! Prepare the way! Remove any obstacle from the way of my people.’”
15 For this is what the High and Lofty One says, Who lives forever and whose name is holy: “I reside in the high and holy place, But also with those crushed and lowly in spirit, To revive the spirit of the lowly And to revive the heart of those being crushed.
16 For I will not oppose them forever Or always remain indignant; For a man’s spirit would grow feeble because of me, Even the breathing creatures that I have made.
17 I was indignant at his sinful pursuit of dishonest gain, So I struck him, I hid my face, and I was indignant. But he kept walking as a renegade, following the way of his heart.
18 I have seen his ways, But I will heal him and lead him And restore comfort to him and to his mourning ones.”
19 “I am creating the fruit of the lips. Continuous peace will be given to the one who is far away and the one who is near,” says Jehovah, “And I will heal him.”
20 “But the wicked are like the restless sea that cannot calm down, And its waters keep tossing up seaweed and mire.
21 There is no peace,” says my God, “for the wicked.”
58 “Call out full-throated; do not hold back! Raise your voice like a horn. Proclaim to my people their revolt, To the house of Jacob their sins.
2 They seek me day after day, And they express delight to know my ways, As if they were a nation that had practiced righteousness And had not abandoned the justice of their God. They ask me for righteous judgments, Delighting to draw close to God:
3 ‘Why do you not see when we fast? And why do you not notice when we afflict ourselves?’ Because on the day of your fast, you pursue your own interests, And you oppress your laborers.
4 Your fasting ends in quarrels and fights, And you strike with the fist of wickedness. You cannot fast as you do today and have your voice heard in heaven.
5 Should the fast that I choose be like this, As a day for someone to afflict himself, To bow down his head like a rush, To make his bed on sackcloth and ashes? Is this what you call a fast and a day pleasing to Jehovah?
6 No, this is the fast that I choose: To remove the fetters of wickedness, To untie the bands of the yoke bar, To let the oppressed go free, And to break in half every yoke bar;
7 It is to share your bread with the hungry, To bring the poor and homeless into your house, To clothe someone naked when you see him, And not to turn your back on your own flesh.
8 Then your light will shine through like the dawn, And your healing will spring up quickly. Your righteousness will go before you, And the glory of Jehovah will be your rear guard.
9 Then you will call, and Jehovah will answer; You will cry for help, and he will say, ‘Here I am!’ If you remove from among you the yoke bar And stop pointing your finger and speaking maliciously,
10 If you grant to the hungry what you yourself desire And satisfy those who are afflicted, Then your light will shine even in the darkness, And your gloom will be like midday.
11 Jehovah will always lead you And satisfy you even in a parched land; He will invigorate your bones, And you will become like a well-watered garden, Like a spring whose waters never fail.
12 They will rebuild ancient ruins on your account, And you will restore the foundations of past generations. You will be called the repairer of the broken walls, The restorer of roadways by which to dwell.
13 If because of the Sabbath you refrain from pursuing your own interests on my holy day And you call the Sabbath an exquisite delight, a holy day of Jehovah, a day to be glorified, And you glorify it rather than pursuing your own interests and speaking idle words,
14 Then you will find your exquisite delight in Jehovah, And I will make you ride on the high places of the earth. I will cause you to eat from the inheritance of Jacob your forefather, For the mouth of Jehovah has spoken.”
59 Look! The hand of Jehovah is not too short to save, Nor is his ear too dull to hear.
2 No, your own errors have separated you from your God. Your sins have made him hide his face from you, And he refuses to hear you.
3 For your palms are polluted with blood And your fingers with error. Your lips speak lies, and your tongue mutters unrighteousness.
4 No one calls out for righteousness, And no one goes to court in truthfulness. They trust in unreality and speak what is worthless. They conceive trouble and give birth to what is harmful.
5 They hatch the eggs of a poisonous snake, And they weave the cobweb of a spider. Anyone who eats their eggs would die, And the egg that is crushed hatches a viper.
6 Their cobweb will not serve as a garment, Nor will they cover themselves with what they make. Their works are harmful, And deeds of violence are in their hands.
7 Their feet run to do evil, And they hurry to shed innocent blood. Their thoughts are harmful thoughts; Ruin and misery are in their ways.
8 They have not known the way of peace, And there is no justice in their tracks. They make their roadways crooked; No one treading on them will know peace.
9 That is why justice is far away from us, And righteousness does not overtake us. We keep hoping for light, but look! there is darkness; For brightness, but we keep walking in gloom.
10 We grope for the wall like blind men; Like those without eyes we keep groping. We stumble at high noon as in evening darkness; Among the strong we are just like the dead.
11 We all keep growling like bears And cooing mournfully like doves. We hope for justice, but there is none; For salvation, but it is far away from us.
12 For our revolts are many before you; Each of our sins testifies against us. For our revolts are with us; We well know our errors.
13 We have transgressed and denied Jehovah; We have turned our backs on our God. We have spoken of oppression and revolt; We have conceived lies and muttered false words from the heart.
14 Justice is driven back, And righteousness stands far off; For truth has stumbled in the public square, And what is upright is unable to enter.
15 Truth has vanished, And anyone who turns away from bad is plundered. Jehovah saw this and was displeased, For there was no justice.
16 He saw that there was no man, And he was astonished that no one interceded, So his own arm brought about salvation, And his own righteousness supported him.
17 Then he put on righteousness like a coat of mail And the helmet of salvation on his head. He put on the garments of vengeance as his clothing And wrapped himself with zeal like a coat.
18 He will reward them for what they have done: Wrath to his adversaries, retribution to his enemies. And to the islands he will repay their due.
19 From the sunset they will fear the name of Jehovah And from the sunrise his glory, For he will come in like a rushing river, Which the spirit of Jehovah drives along.
20 “To Zion the Repurchaser will come, To those in Jacob who turn from transgression,” declares Jehovah.
21 “As for me, this is my covenant with them,” says Jehovah. “My spirit that is on you and my words that I have placed in your mouth—they will not be removed from your mouth, from the mouth of your children, or from the mouth of your grandchildren,” says Jehovah, “from now on and forever.”
60 “Arise, O woman, shed light, for your light has come. The glory of Jehovah shines on you.
2 For look! darkness will cover the earth And thick gloom the nations; But on you Jehovah will shine, And on you his glory will be seen.
3 Nations will go to your light And kings to your shining splendor.
4 Raise your eyes and look all around you! They have all been assembled; they are coming to you. From far away your sons keep coming, And your daughters being supported on the hip.
5 At that time you will see and become radiant, And your heart will throb and overflow, Because the wealth of the sea will be directed to you; The resources of the nations will come to you.
6 Throngs of camels will cover your land, Young male camels of Midʹi·an and Eʹphah. All those from Sheʹba—they will come; Gold and frankincense they will carry. They will proclaim the praises of Jehovah.
7 All the flocks of Keʹdar will be gathered to you. The rams of Ne·baʹioth will serve you. They will come on my altar with approval, And I will beautify my glorious house.
8 Who are these that fly along like clouds, Like doves to their dovecotes?
9 For in me the islands will hope; The ships of Tarʹshish are in the lead, To bring your sons from far away, Along with their silver and their gold, To the name of Jehovah your God and to the Holy One of Israel, For he will glorify you.
10 Foreigners will build your walls, And their kings will minister to you, For in my indignation I struck you, But in my favor I will have mercy on you.
11 Your gates will be kept open constantly; They will not be closed by day or by night, To bring to you the resources of the nations, And their kings will take the lead.
12 For any nation and any kingdom that will not serve you will perish, And the nations will be utterly devastated.
13 To you the glory of Lebʹa·non will come, The juniper tree, the ash tree, and the cypress together, To beautify the place of my sanctuary; I will glorify the place for my feet.
14 The sons of those who oppressed you will come and bow down before you; All those treating you disrespectfully must bow down at your feet, And they will have to call you the city of Jehovah, Zion of the Holy One of Israel.
15 Instead of your being abandoned and hated, with nobody passing through, I will make you a source of everlasting pride, A cause for rejoicing throughout all generations.
16 And you will actually drink the milk of nations, At the breast of kings you will nurse; And you will certainly know that I, Jehovah, am your Savior, And the Powerful One of Jacob is your Repurchaser.
17 Instead of the copper I will bring in gold, And instead of the iron I will bring in silver, Instead of the wood, copper, And instead of the stones, iron; And I will appoint peace as your overseers And righteousness as your task assigners.
18 No more will violence be heard in your land Or destruction and ruin within your boundaries. And you will call your walls Salvation and your gates Praise.
19 For you the sun will no longer be a light by day, Nor will the shining of the moon give you light, For Jehovah will become to you an eternal light, And your God will be your beauty.
20 No more will your sun set, Nor will your moon wane, For Jehovah will become for you an eternal light, And the days of your mourning will have ended.
21 And all your people will be righteous; They will possess the land forever. They are the sprout that I planted, The work of my hands, for me to be beautified.
22 The little one will become a thousand And the small one a mighty nation. I myself, Jehovah, will speed it up in its own time.”
61 The spirit of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah is upon me, Because Jehovah anointed me to declare good news to the meek. He sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, To proclaim liberty to the captives And the wide opening of the eyes to the prisoners,
2 To proclaim the year of Jehovah’s goodwill And the day of vengeance of our God, To comfort all who mourn,
3 To provide for those mourning over Zion, To give them a headdress instead of ashes, The oil of exultation instead of mourning, The garment of praise instead of a despondent spirit. And they will be called big trees of righteousness, The planting of Jehovah, in order to glorify him.
4 They will rebuild the ancient ruins; They will raise up the desolated places of the past, And they will restore the devastated cities, The places that lay desolate for generation after generation.
5 “Strangers will stand and shepherd your flocks, And foreigners will be your farmers and your vinedressers.
6 As for you, you will be called the priests of Jehovah; They will call you the ministers of our God. You will eat the resources of the nations, And about their glory you will boast.
7 Instead of shame you will have a double portion, And instead of humiliation they will shout joyfully over their share. Yes, they will possess a double portion in their land. Everlasting rejoicing will be theirs.
8 For I, Jehovah, love justice; I hate robbery and unrighteousness. I will faithfully give them their wages, And I will make an everlasting covenant with them.
9 Their offspring will be known among the nations And their descendants among the peoples. All who see them will recognize them, That they are the offspring whom Jehovah has blessed.”
10 I will greatly exult in Jehovah. My whole being will rejoice in my God. For he has clothed me with the garments of salvation; He has wrapped me with the robe of righteousness, Just like a bridegroom who wears a turban like that of a priest, And like a bride who adorns herself with her ornaments.
11 For as the earth brings forth its sprouts And as the garden makes what is sown in it sprout, So will the Sovereign Lord Jehovah Cause righteousness and praise to sprout before all the nations.
62 For the sake of Zion I will not keep silent, And for the sake of Jerusalem I will not keep still Until her righteousness shines like a bright light And her salvation burns like a torch.
2 “The nations will see your righteousness, O woman, And all kings your glory. And you will be called by a new name, Which Jehovah’s own mouth will designate.
3 You will become a crown of beauty in the hand of Jehovah, A royal turban in the palm of your God.
4 No more will you be called an abandoned woman, And your land will no longer be called desolate. But you will be called My Delight Is in Her, And your land will be called the Married One. For Jehovah will take delight in you, And your land will be as one married.
5 For just as a young man marries a virgin, Your sons will marry you. With the rejoicing of a bridegroom over a bride, Your God will rejoice over you.
6 Upon your walls, O Jerusalem, I have commissioned watchmen. Continuously, all day long and all night long, they should not be silent. You who make mention of Jehovah, Do not rest,
7 And do not give him any rest until he firmly establishes Jerusalem, Yes, until he makes her the praise of the earth.”
8 Jehovah has sworn an oath with his right hand, with his strong arm: “I will no longer give your grain as food to your enemies, Nor will foreigners drink your new wine, for which you have toiled.
9 But those gathering it will eat it and they will praise Jehovah; And those collecting it will drink it in my holy courtyards.”
10 Pass through, pass through the gates. Clear the way for the people. Build up, build up the highway. Rid it of stones. Raise up a signal for the peoples.
11 Look! Jehovah has proclaimed to the ends of the earth: “Say to the daughter of Zion, ‘Look! Your salvation is coming. Look! His reward is with him, And the wage he pays is before him.’”
12 They will be called the holy people, those repurchased by Jehovah, And you will be called Sought After, a City Not Abandoned.
63 Who is this coming from Eʹdom, From Bozʹrah with bright-colored garments, This one with splendid clothing, Marching in his great power? “It is I, the One speaking in righteousness, The One with great power to save.”
2 Why is your clothing red, And why are your garments like those of one treading the winepress?
3 “I have trodden the wine trough alone. No one from the peoples was with me. I kept treading them in my anger, And I kept trampling them in my wrath. My garments were spattered with their blood, And I have stained all my clothing.
4 For the day of vengeance is in my heart, And the year of my repurchased ones has come.
5 I looked, but there was no one to help; I was appalled that no one offered support. So my arm brought me salvation, And my own wrath supported me.
6 I trampled peoples in my anger, I made them drunk with my wrath And poured out their blood on the ground.”
7 I will mention Jehovah’s acts of loyal love, The praiseworthy acts of Jehovah, Because of all that Jehovah has done for us, The many good things he has done for the house of Israel, According to his mercy and his great loyal love.
8 For he said: “Surely they are my people, sons who will not be disloyal.” So he became their Savior.
9 During all their distress it was distressing to him. And his own personal messenger saved them. In his love and compassion he repurchased them, And he lifted them up and carried them all the days of old.
10 But they rebelled and grieved his holy spirit. He then turned into their enemy, And he fought against them.
11 And they remembered the days of old, The days of Moses his servant: “Where is the One who brought them up out of the sea with the shepherds of his flock? Where is the One who put within him His holy spirit,
12 The One who made His glorious arm go with the right hand of Moses, The One who split the waters before them To make an everlasting name for himself,
13 The One who made them walk through the surging waters, So that they walked without stumbling, Like a horse in the open country?
14 Just like livestock when they go down into the valley plain, The spirit of Jehovah made them rest.” This is how you led your people, To make a majestic name for yourself.
15 Look down from heaven and see From your lofty abode of holiness and glory. Where are your zeal and your mightiness, The stirring of your compassions and your mercy? They are withheld from me.
16 For you are our Father; Although Abraham may not know us And Israel may not recognize us, You, O Jehovah, are our Father. Our Repurchaser of long ago is your name.
17 Why do you, O Jehovah, let us wander from your ways? Why do you let our hearts become hard, so that we do not fear you? Return, for the sake of your servants, The tribes of your inheritance.
18 Your holy people possessed it for a short time. Our adversaries have trampled on your sanctuary.
19 For too long we have become like those you never ruled over, Like those never called by your name.
64 If only you had ripped the heavens apart and come down, So that the mountains would quake because of you,
2 As when a fire ignites the brushwood, And the fire makes the water boil, Then your name would be known to your adversaries, And the nations would tremble before you!
3 When you did awe-inspiring things that we dared not hope for, You came down, and the mountains quaked before you.
4 From of old no one has heard or given ear, Nor has any eye seen a God except you, Who acts in behalf of those who keep in expectation of him.
5 You have met up with those who joyfully do what is right, Those who remember you and follow your ways. Look! You became indignant, while we kept sinning, We did so for a long time. Should we now be saved?
6 And we have all become like someone unclean, And all our acts of righteousness are like a menstrual cloth. We will all wither like a leaf, And our errors will carry us off like the wind.
7 There is no one calling on your name, No one who stirs himself to take hold of you, For you have hidden your face from us, And you cause us to waste away because of our error.
8 But now, O Jehovah, you are our Father. We are the clay, and you are our Potter; We are all the work of your hand.
9 Do not become too indignant, O Jehovah, And do not remember our error forever. Look at us, please, for we are all your people.
10 Your holy cities have become a wilderness. Zion has become a wilderness, Jerusalem a wasteland.
11 Our house of holiness and glory, Where our forefathers praised you, Has been burned with fire, And all the things we cherished lie in ruins.
12 In view of this, will you still restrain yourself, O Jehovah? Will you remain silent and let us be afflicted so severely?
66 This is what Jehovah says: “The heavens are my throne, and the earth is my footstool. Where, then, is the house that you could build for me, And where is my resting-place?”
2 “My own hand has made all these things, And this is how they all came to be,” declares Jehovah. “To this one, then, I will look, To the one humble and broken in spirit who trembles at my word.
3 The one slaughtering the bull is like one striking down a man. The one sacrificing a sheep is like one breaking the neck of a dog. The one offering a gift—like the blood of a pig! The one presenting a memorial offering of frankincense is like one saying a blessing with magical words. They have chosen their own ways, And they take delight in what is disgusting.
4 So I will choose ways to punish them, And the very things they dread I will bring upon them. Because when I called, no one answered; When I spoke, there were none who listened. They kept doing what was bad in my eyes, And they chose to do what displeased me.”
5 Hear the word of Jehovah, you who tremble at his word: “Your brothers who hate you and exclude you because of my name said, ‘May Jehovah be glorified!’ But He will appear and bring you joy, And they are the ones who will be put to shame.”
6 There is a sound of uproar from the city, a sound from the temple! It is the sound of Jehovah repaying his enemies what they deserve.
7 Before she went into labor, she gave birth. Before birth pangs came to her, she delivered a male child.
8 Who has ever heard of such a thing? Who has seen such things? Will a land be brought to birth in one day? Or will a nation be born all at once? Yet, as soon as Zion went into labor, she gave birth to her sons.
9 “Will I bring it to the point of birth and then not bring it forth?” says Jehovah. “Or would I cause the birth and then shut the womb?” says your God.
10 Rejoice with Jerusalem and be joyful with her, all you who love her. Exult greatly with her, all you who are in mourning over her,
11 For you will nurse and be fully satisfied from her breast of consolation, And you will drink deeply and find delight in the abundance of her glory.
12 For this is what Jehovah says: “Here I am extending to her peace just like a river And the glory of nations like a flooding torrent. You will nurse and be carried on the hip, And you will be bounced on the knees.
13 As a mother comforts her son, So I will keep comforting you; And over Jerusalem you will be comforted.
14 You will see this, and your heart will rejoice, Your bones will flourish just like new grass. And the hand of Jehovah will become known to his servants, But he will denounce his enemies.”
15 “For Jehovah will come as a fire, And his chariots are like a storm wind, To repay in furious anger, To rebuke with flames of fire.
16 For with fire Jehovah will execute judgment, Yes, with his sword, against all flesh; And the slain of Jehovah will be many.
17 “Those sanctifying themselves and cleansing themselves to enter the gardens following one who is in the center, those eating the flesh of pigs and loathsome things and mice, they will all come to their end together,” declares Jehovah.
18 “Since I know about their works and their thoughts, I am coming to gather people of all nations and languages, and they will come and see my glory.”
19 “I will set a sign among them, and I will send some of those who escape to the nations—to Tarʹshish, Pul, and Lud, those who draw the bow, to Tuʹbal and Jaʹvan, and to the faraway islands—who have not heard a report about me or seen my glory; and they will proclaim my glory among the nations.
20 They will bring all your brothers out of all the nations as a gift to Jehovah, on horses, in chariots, in covered wagons, on mules, and on swift camels, up to my holy mountain, Jerusalem,” says Jehovah, “just as when the people of Israel bring their gift in a clean vessel into the house of Jehovah.”
21 “I will also take some for the priests and for the Levites,” says Jehovah.
22 “For just as the new heavens and the new earth that I am making will remain standing before me,” declares Jehovah, “so your offspring and your name will remain.”
23 “And from new moon to new moon and from sabbath to sabbath, All flesh will come in to bow down before me,” says Jehovah.
24 “And they will go out and look on the carcasses of the men who rebelled against me; For the worms on them will not die, And their fire will not be extinguished, And they will become something repulsive to all people.”
1 These are the words of Jeremiah the son of Hil·kiʹah, one of the priests in Anʹa·thoth in the land of Benjamin.
2 The word of Jehovah came to him in the days of Jo·siʹah the son of Aʹmon, the king of Judah, in the 13th year of his reign.
3 It came also in the days of Je·hoiʹa·kim the son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, until the completion of the 11th year of Zed·e·kiʹah the son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, until Jerusalem went into exile in the fifth month.
4 The word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
5 “Before I formed you in the womb I knew you, And before you were born I sanctified you. I made you a prophet to the nations.”
6 But I said: “Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah! I do not know how to speak, for I am just a boy.”
7 Jehovah then said to me: “Do not say, ‘I am just a boy.’ For you must go to all those to whom I send you, And you should say everything that I command you.
8 Do not be afraid because of their appearance, For ‘I am with you to save you,’ declares Jehovah.”
9 Then Jehovah stretched out his hand and touched my mouth. And Jehovah said to me: “I have put my words in your mouth.
10 See, I have commissioned you this day to be over the nations and over the kingdoms, to uproot and to pull down, to destroy and to tear down, to build and to plant.”
11 The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying: “What do you see, Jeremiah?” So I said: “I see the branch of an almond tree.”
12 Jehovah said to me: “You have seen correctly, for I am wide awake concerning my word to carry it out.”
13 The word of Jehovah came to me a second time, saying: “What do you see?” So I said: “I see a boiling pot, and its mouth is tilted away from the north.”
14 Then Jehovah said to me: “Out of the north the calamity will break loose Against all the inhabitants of the land.
15 For ‘I am summoning all the families of the kingdoms of the north,’ declares Jehovah, ‘And they will come; each one will set up his throne At the entrance of the gates of Jerusalem, Against her walls all around And against all the cities of Judah.
16 And I will declare my judgments against them over all their wickedness, Because they have abandoned me, And they are making sacrificial smoke to other gods And bowing down to the works of their own hands.’
17 But you should prepare for action, And you must stand up and tell them everything that I command you. Do not be terrified of them, So that I do not terrify you before them.
18 For today I have made you a fortified city, An iron pillar, and copper walls against all the land, Toward the kings of Judah and her princes, Toward her priests and the people of the land.
19 And they will certainly fight against you, But they will not prevail against you, For ‘I am with you,’ declares Jehovah, ‘to save you.’”
2 The word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
2 “Go and proclaim in the ears of Jerusalem, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “I well remember the devotion of your youth, The love you showed when you were engaged to marry, How you followed me in the wilderness, In a land not sown with seed.
3 Israel was holy to Jehovah, the firstfruits of his harvest.”’ ‘Anyone devouring him would become guilty. Disaster would come upon them,’ declares Jehovah.”
4 Hear the word of Jehovah, O house of Jacob, And all you families of the house of Israel.
5 This is what Jehovah says: “What fault did your forefathers find in me, So that they strayed so far from me, And they walked after worthless idols and became worthless themselves?
6 They did not ask, ‘Where is Jehovah, The One who brought us out of the land of Egypt, Who led us through the wilderness, Through a land of deserts and pits, Through a land of drought and of deep shadow, Through a land where no man travels And where no humans dwell?’
7 I then brought you to a land of orchards, To eat its fruitage and its good things. But you came in and defiled my land; You made my inheritance something detestable.
8 The priests did not ask, ‘Where is Jehovah?’ Those handling the Law did not know me, The shepherds rebelled against me, The prophets prophesied by Baʹal, And they followed those who could bring no benefit.
9 ‘So I will contend further with you,’ declares Jehovah, ‘And I will contend with the sons of your sons.’
10 ‘But cross over to the coastlands of the Kitʹtim and see. Yes, send to Keʹdar and consider carefully; See whether anything like this has happened.
11 Has a nation ever changed its gods for those that are not gods? But my own people have exchanged my glory for what is useless.
12 Stare in amazement at this, you heavens; Shudder in absolute horror,’ declares Jehovah,
13 ‘Because my people have done two bad things: They have abandoned me, the source of living water, And dug for themselves cisterns, Broken cisterns, that cannot hold water.’
14 ‘Is Israel a servant or a slave born in the household? Then why has he been given over to plunder?
15 Against him young lions roar; They have raised their voice. They made his land an object of horror. His cities have been set on fire, so that there is no inhabitant.
16 The people of Noph and Tahʹpan·es feed on the crown of your head.
17 Have you not brought this on yourself By abandoning Jehovah your God While he was leading you in the way?
18 Now why do you wish for the way to Egypt To drink the waters of Shiʹhor? Why do you wish for the way to As·syrʹi·a To drink the waters of the River?
19 Your wickedness should correct you, And your own unfaithfulness should reprove you. Know and realize how bad and bitter it is To abandon Jehovah your God; You have shown no fear of me,’ declares the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies.
20 ‘For long ago I smashed your yoke And tore off your shackles. But you said: “I am not going to serve,” For on every high hill and under every luxuriant tree You were lying sprawled out, prostituting yourself.
21 I planted you as a choice red vine, all of it pure seed; So how have you turned into the degenerate shoots of a foreign vine before me?’
22 ‘Though you should wash with soda and use much lye, Your guilt would still be a stain before me,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
23 How can you say, ‘I have not defiled myself. I have not followed the Baʹals’? Look at your way in the valley. Consider what you have done. You are like a swift, young she-camel, Aimlessly running back and forth in her ways,
24 A wild donkey accustomed to the wilderness, Sniffing the wind in her lust. Who can restrain her when she is in heat? None of those looking for her will need to weary themselves. In her season they will find her.
25 Keep your feet from going bare And your throat from thirst. But you said, ‘It is hopeless! No! I have fallen in love with strangers, And I will follow them.’
26 Like the shame of a thief when he is caught, So the house of Israel has been put to shame, They, their kings and their princes, Their priests and their prophets.
27 They say to a tree, ‘You are my father,’ And to a stone, ‘You gave birth to me.’ But to me they turn their back and not their face. And in the time of their calamity they will say, ‘Rise up and save us!’
28 Now where are your gods that you made for yourself? Let them rise up if they can save you in your time of calamity, For your gods have become as numerous as your cities, O Judah.
29 ‘Why do you keep contending against me? Why have all of you rebelled against me?’ declares Jehovah.
30 I have struck your sons in vain. They would accept no discipline; Your own sword devoured your prophets, Like a marauding lion.
31 O generation, consider for yourselves the word of Jehovah. Have I become like a wilderness to Israel Or a land of oppressive darkness? Why have these, my people, said, ‘We roam freely. We will come to you no more’?
32 Can a virgin forget her ornaments, A bride her breastbands? And yet my own people have forgotten me for countless days.
33 How skillfully, O woman, you set your course to seek love! You have trained yourself in the ways of wickedness.
34 Even your skirts are stained with the blood of the innocent poor ones, Though I did not find them in the act of breaking in; It is on all your skirts.
35 But you say, ‘I am innocent. Surely his anger has turned back from me.’ Now I am bringing judgment against you Because you say, ‘I have not sinned.’
36 Why do you treat so lightly your unstable course? You will become ashamed of Egypt too, Just as you became ashamed of As·syrʹi·a.
37 For this reason also you will go out with your hands on your head, For Jehovah has rejected those in whom you put confidence; They will not bring you success.”
3 People ask: “If a man sends his wife away and she leaves him and becomes another man’s, should he return to her anymore?” Has that land not been utterly polluted? “You have committed prostitution with many companions, And should you now return to me?” declares Jehovah.
2 “Raise your eyes to the bare hills and see. Where have you not been raped? You sat along the roadways for them, Like a nomad in the wilderness. You keep polluting the land With your prostitution and your wickedness.
3 So showers of rain are withheld, And there is no rain in the spring. You have the brazen look of a wife who commits prostitution; You refuse to feel shame.
4 But now you call out to me, ‘My Father, you are the companion of my youth!
5 Should one stay resentful forever, Or always hold a grudge?’ This is what you say, But you keep doing all the evil you are capable of doing.”
6 In the days of King Jo·siʹah, Jehovah said to me: “‘Have you seen what unfaithful Israel has done? She has gone up on every high mountain and underneath every luxuriant tree to commit prostitution.
7 Even after she did all these things, I kept telling her to return to me, but she did not return; and Judah kept watching her treacherous sister.
8 When I saw that, I sent unfaithful Israel away with a full certificate of divorce because of her adultery. But her treacherous sister Judah did not become afraid; she too went out and committed prostitution.
9 She took her prostitution lightly, and she kept polluting the land and committing adultery with stones and with trees.
10 Despite all this, her treacherous sister Judah did not return to me with all her heart, only in pretense,’ declares Jehovah.”
11 Jehovah then said to me: “Unfaithful Israel has shown herself to be more righteous than treacherous Judah.
12 Go and proclaim these words to the north: “‘“Return, O renegade Israel,” declares Jehovah.’ ‘“I will not look down angrily on you, for I am loyal,” declares Jehovah.’ ‘“I will not stay resentful forever.
13 Only acknowledge your guilt, for you have rebelled against Jehovah your God. You continued scattering your favors to strangers under every luxuriant tree, but you would not obey my voice,” declares Jehovah.’”
14 “Return, you renegade sons,” declares Jehovah. “For I have become your true master; and I will take you, one from a city and two from a family, and I will bring you to Zion.
15 And I will give you shepherds after my own heart, and they will feed you with knowledge and insight.
16 You will become many and will bear fruit in the land in those days,” declares Jehovah. “No more will they say, ‘The ark of the covenant of Jehovah!’ It will not come up into the heart, nor will they remember it or miss it, and it will not be made again.
17 At that time they will call Jerusalem the throne of Jehovah; and all the nations will be brought together to the name of Jehovah at Jerusalem, and they will no longer stubbornly follow their own wicked heart.”
18 “In those days they will walk together, the house of Judah alongside the house of Israel, and together they will come from the land of the north into the land that I gave to your forefathers as an inheritance.
19 And I thought, ‘How I placed you among the sons and gave you the desirable land, the most beautiful inheritance among the nations!’ I also thought that you would call me, ‘My Father!’ and that you would not turn away from following me.
20 ‘Truly as a wife treacherously leaves her husband, so also you, O house of Israel, have dealt treacherously with me,’ declares Jehovah.”
21 On the bare hills a sound is heard, The weeping and the pleading of the people of Israel, For they have distorted their way; They have forgotten Jehovah their God.
22 “Return, you renegade sons. I will heal your renegade condition.” “Here we are! We have come to you, For you, O Jehovah, are our God.
23 Truly the hills and the turmoil on the mountains are a delusion. Truly in Jehovah our God is the salvation of Israel.
24 But the shameful thing has consumed the toil of our forefathers since our youth, Their flocks and their herds, Their sons and their daughters.
25 Let us lie down in our shame, And let our disgrace cover us, For we have sinned against Jehovah our God, We and our fathers since our youth until this day, And we have not obeyed the voice of Jehovah our God.”
4 “If you will return, O Israel,” declares Jehovah, “If you will return to me And if you will remove your disgusting idols from before me, Then you will not be a fugitive.
2 And if you swear, ‘As surely as Jehovah is alive!’ in truth, justice, and righteousness, Then the nations will obtain a blessing for themselves by him, And in him they will boast.”
3 For this is what Jehovah says to the men of Judah and to Jerusalem: “Plow for yourselves arable land, And do not keep sowing among thorns.
4 Circumcise yourselves to Jehovah, And remove the foreskins of your hearts, You men of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem, So that my wrath may not blaze up like a fire And burn with no one to extinguish it, Because of your evil deeds.”
5 Declare it in Judah, and proclaim it in Jerusalem. Shout and blow a horn throughout the land. Call out loudly and say: “Gather together, And let us flee into the fortified cities.
6 Raise a signal toward Zion. Seek shelter, and do not stand still,” For I am bringing in calamity from the north, a great crash.
7 He has emerged like a lion from his thicket; The destroyer of nations has set out. He has gone out from his place to make your land an object of horror. Your cities will be reduced to ruins, without an inhabitant.
8 Therefore, put on sackcloth, Mourn and wail, Because the burning anger of Jehovah has not turned away from us.
9 “In that day,” declares Jehovah, “the heart of the king will fail him, Also the heart of the princes; The priests will be horrified, and the prophets will be amazed.”
10 Then I said: “Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah! Truly you have utterly deceived this people and Jerusalem, saying, ‘You will have peace,’ when the sword is at our throats.”
11 At that time it will be said to this people and to Jerusalem: “A scorching wind from the barren hills of the desert Will sweep down on the daughter of my people; It is not coming to winnow or to cleanse.
12 The full wind comes from these places at my bidding. Now I will pronounce judgments against them.
13 Look! He will come like rain clouds, And his chariots are like a storm wind. His horses are swifter than eagles. Woe to us, for we are ruined!
14 Wash your heart clean of wickedness, O Jerusalem, in order to be saved. How long will you harbor wicked thoughts?
15 For a voice tells the news from Dan, And it proclaims disaster from the mountains of Eʹphra·im.
16 Report it, yes, to the nations; Proclaim it against Jerusalem.” “Sentinels are coming from a distant land, And they will raise their voices against the cities of Judah.
17 They come against her on all sides like guards of the open field, Because she has rebelled against me,” declares Jehovah.
18 “Your own ways and your actions will be brought upon you. How bitter is your disaster, For it reaches clear to your heart!”
19 O my anguish, my anguish! I feel great pain in my very heart. My heart pounds within me. I cannot keep silent, For I have heard the sound of the horn, The alarm signal of war.
20 Disaster after disaster has been reported, For the whole land has been destroyed. Suddenly my own tents are destroyed, In a moment my tent cloths.
21 How long will I keep seeing the signal, Keep hearing the sound of the horn?
22 “For my people are foolish; They take no note of me. They are stupid sons, with no understanding. They are clever enough when it comes to doing bad, But they do not know how to do good.”
23 I saw the land, and look! it was empty and desolate. I looked at the heavens, and their light was no more.
24 I saw the mountains, and look! they were quaking, And the hills were shaking.
25 I saw, and look! there was no man, And the birds of the heavens had all fled.
26 I saw, and look! the orchard had become a wilderness, And its cities had all been torn down. It was because of Jehovah, Because of his burning anger.
27 For this is what Jehovah says: “The whole land will become desolate, But I will not carry out a complete extermination.
28 For this reason the land will mourn, And the heavens above will become dark. It is because I have spoken, I have decided, And I will not change my mind, nor will I turn back from it.
29 At the sound of the horsemen and the archers, The entire city flees. They enter into the thickets, And they climb the rocks. Every city is abandoned, And no man dwells in them.”
30 Now that you are devastated, what will you do? You used to clothe yourself with scarlet, To deck yourself with gold ornaments, And to enlarge your eyes with black paint. But it is in vain that you beautified yourself, For those lusting after you have rejected you; They are now seeking to take your life.
31 For I have heard the sound like that of a sick woman, The distress like that of a woman giving birth to her first child, The voice of the daughter of Zion who keeps gasping for breath. She says as she spreads out her palms: “Woe to me, for I am exhausted because of the killers!”
5 Roam the streets of Jerusalem. Look around and take note. Search her public squares to see Whether you can find a man who acts with justice, One who seeks to be faithful, And I will forgive her.
2 Even if they say: “As surely as Jehovah is alive!” They would still swear to what is false.
3 O Jehovah, do your eyes not look for faithfulness? You struck them, but it made no impact on them. You exterminated them, but they refused to accept discipline. They made their faces harder than a rock, And they refused to turn around.
4 But I said to myself: “Surely these must be the lowly. They act foolishly, for they do not know the way of Jehovah, The judgment of their God.
5 I will go to the prominent men and speak with them, For they must have taken note of the way of Jehovah, The judgment of their God. But they had all broken the yoke And torn apart the restraints.”
6 That is why a lion of the forest attacks them, A wolf of the desert plains keeps ravaging them, A leopard lies awake at their cities. Everyone going out from them is torn to pieces. For their transgressions are many; Their acts of unfaithfulness are numerous.
7 How can I forgive you for this? Your sons have abandoned me, And they swear by what is no God. I satisfied their needs, But they kept committing adultery, And they flocked to the house of a prostitute.
8 They are like eager, lustful horses, Each neighing after another man’s wife.
9 “Should I not call them to account for these things?” declares Jehovah. “Should I not avenge myself on such a nation?”
10 “Come up against her vineyard terraces and bring ruin, But do not make a complete extermination. Take away her spreading shoots, For they do not belong to Jehovah.
11 For the house of Israel and the house of Judah Have been utterly treacherous with me,” declares Jehovah.
12 “They have denied Jehovah, and they keep saying, ‘He will do nothing. No calamity will come upon us; We will not see sword or famine.’
13 The prophets are full of wind, And the word is not in them. Let this happen to them!”
14 Therefore this is what Jehovah, the God of armies, says: “Because these men are saying this, Here I am making my words a fire in your mouth, And this people is the wood, And it will consume them.”
15 “Here I am bringing in on you a nation from far away, O house of Israel,” declares Jehovah. “It is an enduring nation. It is an ancient nation, A nation whose language you do not know, And whose speech you cannot understand.
16 Their quiver is like an open grave; All of them are warriors.
17 They will devour your harvest and your bread. They will devour your sons and your daughters. They will devour your flocks and your herds. They will devour your vines and your fig trees. They will destroy with the sword your fortified cities in which you trust.”
18 “But even in those days,” declares Jehovah, “I will not carry out a complete extermination of you.
19 And when they ask, ‘Why has Jehovah our God done all these things to us?’ you should answer them, ‘Just as you abandoned me to serve a foreign god in your land, so you will serve foreigners in a land that is not yours.’”
20 Declare this in the house of Jacob, And proclaim it in Judah, saying:
21 “Hear this, you foolish and senseless people: They have eyes but cannot see; They have ears but cannot hear.
22 ‘Do you not fear me?’ declares Jehovah, ‘Should you not tremble before me? It is I who placed the sand as the boundary for the sea, A permanent regulation that it cannot pass over. Although its waves toss, they cannot prevail; Although they roar, they still cannot pass beyond it.
23 But this people has a stubborn and rebellious heart; They have turned aside and gone their own way.
24 And they do not say in their heart: “Let us now fear Jehovah our God, The One who gives the rain in its season, Both the autumn rain and the spring rain, The One who guards for us the appointed weeks of the harvest.”
25 Your own errors have prevented these things from coming; Your own sins have deprived you of what is good.
26 For among my people there are wicked men. They keep peering, as when birdcatchers crouch down. They set a deadly trap. It is men whom they catch.
27 Like a cage full of birds, So their houses are full of deception. That is why they have become powerful and rich.
28 They have grown fat and smooth; They overflow with evil. They do not plead the legal case of the fatherless, That they may gain success; And they deny justice to the poor.’”
29 “Should I not call them to account for these things?” declares Jehovah. “Should I not avenge myself on such a nation?
30 Something appalling and horrible has occurred in the land:
31 The prophets prophesy lies, And the priests dominate by their own authority. And my own people love it that way. But what will you do when the end comes?”
6 Take shelter, O sons of Benjamin, away from Jerusalem. Blow the horn in Te·koʹa; Light a fire signal over Beth-hac·cheʹrem! For a calamity looms from the north, a great disaster.
2 The daughter of Zion resembles a beautiful and delicate woman.
3 The shepherds and their droves will come. They will pitch their tents all around her, Each grazing the flock in his care.
4 “Prepare for war against her! Rise up, and let us attack her at midday!” “Woe to us, for the day is declining, For the shadows of evening are getting longer!”
5 “Rise up, and let us attack during the night And destroy her fortified towers.”
6 For this is what Jehovah of armies says: “Cut down wood and raise up a siege rampart against Jerusalem. She is the city that must be held to account; There is nothing but oppression within her.
7 As a cistern keeps its water cool, So she keeps her wickedness cool. Violence and destruction are heard in her; Sickness and plague are constantly before me.
8 Be warned, O Jerusalem, or I will turn away from you in disgust; I will make you desolate, a land without inhabitants.”
9 This is what Jehovah of armies says: “They will thoroughly glean the remnant of Israel as the last grapes on a vine. Pass your hand again like one gathering grapes from the vines.”
10 “To whom should I speak and give warning? Who will listen? Look! Their ears are closed, so that they are unable to pay attention. Look! The word of Jehovah has become something they scorn; They find no pleasure in it.
11 So I am filled with the wrath of Jehovah, And I am tired of holding it in.” “Pour it out on the child in the street, On the groups of young men gathered together. They will all be captured, a man along with his wife, The old men along with the very old.
12 Their houses will be turned over to others, Together with their fields and their wives. For I will stretch my hand out against the inhabitants of the land,” declares Jehovah.
13 “For from the least to the greatest, each one is making dishonest gain; From the prophet to the priest, each one is practicing fraud.
14 And they try to heal the breakdown of my people lightly, saying, ‘There is peace! There is peace!’ When there is no peace.
15 Do they feel ashamed of the detestable things they have done? They feel no shame at all! They do not even know how to feel humiliated! So they will fall among the fallen. When I bring punishment on them they will stumble,” says Jehovah.
16 This is what Jehovah says: “Stand at the crossroads and see. Ask about the ancient roadways, Ask where the good way is, and walk in it, And find rest for yourselves.” But they say: “We will not walk in it.”
17 “And I appointed watchmen who said, ‘Pay attention to the sound of the horn!’” But they said: “We will not pay attention.”
18 “Therefore hear, O nations! And know, O assembly, What will happen to them.
19 Listen, O earth! I am bringing calamity on this people As the fruitage of their own schemes, For they paid no attention to my words And they rejected my law.”
20 “What do I care that you bring frankincense from Sheʹba And sweet cane from a distant land? Your whole burnt offerings are not acceptable, And your sacrifices do not please me.”
21 Therefore this is what Jehovah says: “Here I am setting for this people stumbling blocks, And they will stumble over them, Fathers and sons together, A neighbor and his companion, And they will all perish.”
22 This is what Jehovah says: “Look! A people is coming from the land of the north, And a great nation will be awakened from the remotest parts of the earth.
23 They will grab hold of the bow and the javelin. They are cruel and will have no mercy. Their voice will roar like the sea, And they ride on horses. They draw up in battle order like a man of war against you, O daughter of Zion.”
24 We have heard the report about it. Our hands fall limp; Distress has seized us, Anguish like that of a woman giving birth.
25 Do not go out into the field, And do not walk on the road, For the enemy has a sword; There is terror all around.
26 O daughter of my people, Put on sackcloth and roll in the ashes. Mourn as for an only son, with bitter wailing, For suddenly the destroyer will come upon us.
27 “I have made you a metal tester among my people, One making a thorough search; You must take note and examine their way.
28 All of them are the most stubborn men, Walking about as slanderers. They are like copper and iron; All of them are corrupt.
29 The bellows have been scorched. Out from their fire there is lead. One keeps refining intensely simply for nothing, And those who are bad have not been separated.
30 Rejected silver is what people will certainly call them, For Jehovah has rejected them.”
7 This is the word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:
2 “Stand in the gate of the house of Jehovah and proclaim there this message, ‘Hear the word of Jehovah, all you people of Judah who enter these gates to bow down to Jehovah.
3 This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “Reform your ways and your actions, and I will allow you to keep residing in this place.
4 Do not put your trust in deceptive words and say, ‘This is the temple of Jehovah, the temple of Jehovah, the temple of Jehovah!’
5 For if you truly reform your ways and actions; if you truly uphold justice between a man and his neighbor;
6 if you do not oppress foreign residents, orphans, and widows; if you do not shed innocent blood in this place; and if you do not follow other gods to your own harm;
7 then I will allow you to keep residing in this place, in the land I gave to your forefathers for all time.”’”
8 “But you are putting your trust in deceptive words—it will bring absolutely no benefit.
9 Can you steal, murder, commit adultery, swear falsely, make sacrifices to Baʹal, and follow after gods you had not known,
10 and then come and stand before me in this house that bears my name and say, ‘We will be saved,’ despite your doing all these detestable things?
11 Has this house that bears my name become a cave of robbers in your eyes? Here I have seen it for myself,” declares Jehovah.
12 “‘However, go now to my place in Shiʹloh, where I first caused my name to reside, and see what I did to it because of the badness of my people Israel.
13 But you kept doing all these things,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and even though I spoke to you again and again, you did not listen. I kept calling you, but you would not answer.
14 So I will do to the house that bears my name, in which you are trusting, and to this place that I gave to you and your forefathers, just as I did to Shiʹloh.
15 I will throw you out of my sight, just as I threw out all your brothers, all the descendants of Eʹphra·im.’
16 “As for you, do not pray in behalf of this people. Do not cry out or offer a prayer or plead with me in their behalf, for I will not listen to you.
17 Do you not see what they are doing in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem?
18 The sons are gathering wood, the fathers are lighting the fire, and the wives are kneading dough in order to make sacrificial cakes to the Queen of Heaven, and they are pouring out drink offerings to other gods to offend me.
19 ‘But am I the one they are hurting?’ declares Jehovah. ‘Is it not they themselves, to their own shame?’
20 Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says, ‘Look! My anger and my wrath will be poured out on this place, on man and beast, on the trees of the field and the fruitage of the ground; it will burn and will not be extinguished.’
21 “This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Go ahead, add your whole burnt offerings to your other sacrifices, and eat the flesh yourselves.
22 For on the day I brought your forefathers out of the land of Egypt, I did not speak with them or command them concerning whole burnt offerings and sacrifices.
23 But I did give them this command: “Obey my voice, and I will become your God, and you will become my people. You must walk in all the way that I command, so that it may go well with you.”’
24 But they did not listen or incline their ear; instead, they walked in their own schemes, stubbornly following their wicked heart, and they went backward, not forward,
25 from the day your forefathers came out of the land of Egypt until this day. So I kept sending all my servants the prophets to you, sending them each day, again and again.
26 But they refused to listen to me, and they did not incline their ear. Instead, they were stubborn, and they acted worse than their forefathers!
27 “You will speak all these words to them, but they will not listen to you; you will call to them, but they will not answer you.
28 And you will say to them, ‘This is the nation that did not obey the voice of Jehovah their God and refused to accept discipline. Faithfulness has perished and is not even mentioned among them.’
29 “Shear off your uncut hair and throw it away, and on the bare hills raise a dirge, for Jehovah has rejected and will abandon this generation that has infuriated him.
30 ‘For the people of Judah have done what is bad in my eyes,’ declares Jehovah. ‘They have set up their disgusting idols in the house that bears my name, in order to defile it.
31 They have built the high places of Toʹpheth, which is in the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom, in order to burn their sons and their daughters in the fire, something that I had not commanded and that had never even come into my heart.’
32 “‘Therefore look! the days are coming,’ declares Jehovah, ‘when it will no longer be called Toʹpheth or the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom but the Valley of the Slaughter. They will bury in Toʹpheth until there is no place left.
33 And the dead bodies of this people will become food for the birds of the heavens and for the beasts of the earth, with no one to frighten them away.
34 I will put an end to the sound of exultation and the sound of rejoicing, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem, for the land will be reduced to ruins.’”
8 “At that time,” declares Jehovah, “the bones of the kings of Judah, the bones of its princes, the bones of the priests, the bones of the prophets, and the bones of the inhabitants of Jerusalem will be taken from their graves.
2 They will be spread out to the sun and to the moon and to all the army of the heavens that they loved and served and followed and sought after and bowed down to. They will not be gathered, nor will they be buried. They will become like manure on the surface of the ground.”
3 “And the remnant of this evil family who survive will choose death over life in all the places where I disperse them,” declares Jehovah of armies.
4 “And you must say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Will they fall and not get up again? If one would turn back, will the other not also turn back?
5 Why is this people, Jerusalem, unfaithful with an enduring unfaithfulness? They hold fast to deception; They refuse to turn back.
6 I paid attention and kept listening, but the way they spoke was not right. Not a man repented over his wickedness or asked, ‘What have I done?’ Each one keeps returning to the popular course, like a horse dashing into the battle.
7 Even the stork in the sky knows its seasons; The turtledove and the swift and the thrush keep to the time of their return. But my own people do not understand the judgment of Jehovah.”’
8 ‘How can you say: “We are wise, and we have the law of Jehovah”? For in fact, the lying stylus of the scribes has been used only for falsehood.
9 The wise have been put to shame. They have become terrified and will be caught. Look! They have rejected the word of Jehovah, And what wisdom do they have?
10 So I will give their wives to other men, Their fields to other owners; For from the least to the greatest, each one is making dishonest gain; From the prophet to the priest, each one is practicing fraud.
11 And they try to heal the breakdown of the daughter of my people lightly, saying, “There is peace! There is peace!” When there is no peace.
12 Do they feel ashamed of the detestable things they have done? They feel no shame at all! They do not even know how to feel humiliated! So they will fall among the fallen. When I bring punishment on them they will stumble,’ says Jehovah.
13 ‘When I gather them, I will bring them to their end,’ declares Jehovah. ‘There will be no grapes left on the vine, no figs on the fig tree, and the leaves will wither. And what I gave to them will be lost to them.’”
14 “Why are we sitting here? Let us gather together and enter the fortified cities and perish there. For Jehovah our God will do away with us, And he gives us poisoned water to drink, Because we have sinned against Jehovah.
15 There was a hope for peace, but nothing good came, For a time of healing, but there is terror!
16 From Dan is heard the snorting of his horses. At the sound of the neighing of his stallions, The whole land quakes. They come in and devour the land and everything in it, The city and its inhabitants.”
17 “For here I am sending in serpents among you, Poisonous snakes that cannot be charmed, And they will certainly bite you,” declares Jehovah.
18 My grief is incurable; My heart is sick.
19 From a distant land there is a cry for help From the daughter of my people: “Is Jehovah not in Zion? Or is her king not in her?” “Why have they offended me with their graven images, With their worthless foreign gods?”
20 “The harvest has passed, the summer has ended, But we have not been saved!”
21 I am shattered over the breakdown of the daughter of my people; I am dejected. Horror has seized me.
22 Is there no balsam in Gilʹe·ad? Or is there no healer there? Why has the daughter of my people not been restored to health?
9 O that my head were waters, My eyes a fountain of tears! Then I would weep day and night For the slain ones of my people.
2 O that I had a traveler’s lodging place in the wilderness! Then I would leave my people and go away from them, For they are all adulterers, A band of treacherous people.
3 They bend their tongue like a bow; Falsehood, not faithfulness, prevails in the land. “They advance from evil to evil, And they pay no attention to me,” declares Jehovah.
4 “Everyone, be on guard against your neighbor, And do not trust even your brother. For every brother is a betrayer, And every neighbor is a slanderer.
5 Each one cheats his neighbor, And no one speaks truth. They have taught their tongue to speak falsehood. They wear themselves out doing what is wrong.
6 You are living in the midst of deception. In their deception they refused to know me,” declares Jehovah.
7 Therefore this is what Jehovah of armies says: “I will smelt them and test them, For what else can I do with the daughter of my people?
8 Their tongue is a deadly arrow that speaks deception. With his mouth a person speaks of peace to his neighbor, But inside he lays an ambush.”
9 “Should I not call them to account for these things?” declares Jehovah. “Should I not avenge myself on such a nation?
10 I will weep and lament over the mountains And take up a dirge over the pastures of the wilderness, For they have been burned up so that no man passes through, And the sound of livestock is not heard. The birds of heaven and the beasts have fled; they are gone.
11 I will make Jerusalem piles of stones, the lair of jackals, And I will make the cities of Judah desolate, without an inhabitant.
12 Who is wise enough to understand this? To whom has the mouth of Jehovah spoken, that he may declare it? Why has the land perished? Why is it scorched like the wilderness, So that no one is passing through?”
13 Jehovah replied: “Because of their rejecting my law that I set before them, and because they have not followed it and obeyed my voice.
14 Instead, they stubbornly followed their own hearts, and they followed the Baʹal images, as their fathers had taught them to do.
15 Therefore this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Here I am making this people eat wormwood, and I will make them drink poisoned water.
16 I will scatter them among the nations that they and their fathers have not known, and I will send a sword after them until I will have exterminated them.’
17 This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Behave with understanding. Summon the women who sing dirges, And send for the skilled women to come,
18 So that they may hurry and raise a lamentation for us, So that our eyes may stream with tears And our eyelids trickle with water.
19 For the sound of lamentation has been heard from Zion: “How we have been devastated! How great our shame is! For we have left the land, and they have thrown down our homes.”
20 You women, hear the word of Jehovah. May your ear receive the word of his mouth. Teach your daughters this lamentation, And teach one another this dirge.
21 For death has come up through our windows; It has entered our fortified towers To take away the children from the streets And the young men from the public squares.’
22 Say, ‘This is what Jehovah declares: “The dead bodies of people will fall like manure on the surface of the field, Like a row of newly cut grain after the reaper, With no one to gather them up.”’”
23 This is what Jehovah says: “Let not the wise man boast about his wisdom; Let not the mighty man boast about his mightiness; And let not the rich man boast about his riches.”
24 “But let the one boasting boast about this: That he has insight and knowledge of me, That I am Jehovah, the One showing loyal love, justice, and righteousness in the earth, For in these things I take delight,” declares Jehovah.
25 “Look! Days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “and I will hold an accounting with everyone circumcised and yet uncircumcised,
26 with Egypt and Judah and Eʹdom and the Amʹmon·ites and Moʹab and with all of those with hair clipped at the temples who are dwelling in the wilderness; for all the nations are uncircumcised, and all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in heart.”
10 Hear the word that Jehovah has spoken against you, O house of Israel.
2 This is what Jehovah says: “Do not learn the way of the nations, And do not be terrified by the signs of the heavens Because the nations are terrified by them.
3 For the customs of the peoples are a delusion. It is just a tree of the forest that is cut down, Worked by the hands of the craftsman with his tool.
4 They adorn it with silver and gold And fasten it with hammer and nails so that it will not fall over.
5 Like a scarecrow in a cucumber field, they cannot speak; They have to be carried, for they cannot walk. Do not fear them, for they can do no harm, Nor can they do any good.”
6 No one is like you, O Jehovah. You are great, and your name is great and mighty.
7 Who should not fear you, O King of the nations, for it is fitting; Because among all the wise ones of the nations and among all their kingdoms, There is no one at all like you.
8 They are all unreasoning and stupid. Instruction from a tree is an utter delusion.
9 Silver plates are imported from Tarʹshish and gold from Uʹphaz, The work of a craftsman, of the hands of a metalworker. Their clothing is blue thread and purple wool. They are all made by skilled workers.
10 But Jehovah is truly God. He is the living God and the eternal King. Because of his indignation the earth will quake, And no nations will endure his denunciation.
11  This is what you should say to them: “The gods that did not make the heavens and the earth Will perish from the earth and from under these heavens.”
12 He is the Maker of the earth by his power, The One who established the productive land by his wisdom And who stretched out the heavens by his understanding.
13 When he makes his voice heard, The waters in the heavens are in turmoil, And he causes clouds to ascend from the ends of the earth. He makes lightning for the rain, And he brings the wind out of his storehouses.
14 Every man acts unreasonably and without knowledge. Every metalworker will be put to shame because of the carved image; For his metal image is a falsehood, And there is no spirit in them.
15 They are a delusion, a work of mockery. When their day of reckoning comes, they will perish.
16 The Share of Jacob is not like these things, For he is the One who formed everything, And Israel is the staff of his inheritance. Jehovah of armies is his name.
17 Gather up your bundle from the ground, O woman dwelling under siege.
18 For this is what Jehovah says: “Here I am hurling the inhabitants out of the land at this time, And I will cause them to experience distress.”
19 Woe to me because of my breakdown! My wound is incurable. And I said: “Surely this is my sickness, and I must bear it.
20 My tent has been devastated, and my tent cords have all been torn apart. My sons have left me and are no more. There is no one left to stretch out my tent or raise up my tent cloths.
21 For the shepherds have behaved senselessly, And they have not inquired of Jehovah. That is why they have not acted with insight, And all their flocks have been scattered.”
22 Listen! A report! It is coming! A great pounding from the land of the north, To make the cities of Judah desolate, a lair of jackals.
23 I well know, O Jehovah, that man’s way does not belong to him. It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.
24 Correct me, O Jehovah, with judgment, But not in your anger, that you may not reduce me to nothing.
25 Pour out your wrath on the nations who ignore you And on the families who do not call on your name. For they have devoured Jacob, Yes, they have devoured him to the point of extermination, And they have desolated his homeland.
11 This is the word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:
2 “Hear the words of this covenant, you people! “Speak them to the men of Judah and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem
3 and say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: “Cursed is the man who does not obey the words of this covenant,
4 which I commanded your forefathers on the day I brought them out of the land of Egypt, out of the iron-smelting furnace, saying, ‘Obey my voice, and do all the things that I command you; and you will become my people and I will be your God,
5 so that I may fulfill the oath that I swore to your forefathers, to give them the land flowing with milk and honey, as it is this day.’”’” And I answered: “Amen, O Jehovah.”
6 Jehovah then said to me: “Proclaim all these words in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem: ‘Hear the words of this covenant, and carry them out.
7 For I solemnly admonished your forefathers in the day I brought them out of the land of Egypt and to this day, admonishing them again and again: “Obey my voice.”
8 But they did not listen or incline their ear; instead, each kept stubbornly following his own wicked heart. So I brought on them all the words of this covenant that I commanded them to do, but they refused to carry them out.’”
9 Jehovah then said to me: “There is a conspiracy among the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
10 They have returned to the errors of their forefathers of old, who refused to obey my words. They too have followed other gods and have served them. The house of Israel and the house of Judah have broken my covenant that I made with their forefathers.
11 Therefore this is what Jehovah says, ‘Here I am bringing on them a calamity that they will not be able to escape. When they call to me for help, I will not listen to them.
12 Then the cities of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem will go to the gods to which they are making sacrifices and call for help, but these will by no means save them in the time of their calamity.
13 For your gods have become as many as your cities, O Judah, and you have set up as many altars to the shameful thing as there are streets in Jerusalem, altars to make sacrifices to Baʹal.’
14 “As for you, do not pray in behalf of this people. Do not cry out in their behalf or offer a prayer for them, for I will not be listening when they call out to me because of their calamity.
15 What right does my beloved one have to be in my house When so many have carried out evil schemes? With holy flesh will they avert the calamity when it comes upon you? Will you exult at that time?
16 Jehovah once called you a thriving olive tree, Beautiful with fine fruit. With a great roaring sound, he has set her on fire, And they have broken its branches.
17 “Jehovah of armies, your Planter, has declared that a calamity will come upon you because of the evil committed by the house of Israel and the house of Judah, who have offended me by making sacrifices to Baʹal.”
18 Jehovah informed me so that I would know; At that time you caused me to see what they were doing.
19 I was like a docile lamb being brought to the slaughter. I did not know that they were scheming against me: “Let us destroy the tree with its fruit, And let us cut him off from the land of the living, So that his name may be remembered no more.”
20 But Jehovah of armies judges with righteousness; He examines the innermost thoughts and the heart. Let me see your vengeance on them, For to you I have committed my legal case.
21 Therefore this is what Jehovah says against the men of Anʹa·thoth who are seeking to take your life and who say: “You must not prophesy in the name of Jehovah, or you will die by our hand”;
22 therefore this is what Jehovah of armies says: “Here I am going to call them to account. The young men will die by the sword, and their sons and their daughters will die by famine.
23 Not even a remnant will be left of them, because I will bring calamity on the men of Anʹa·thoth in the year of their being called to account.”
12 You are righteous, O Jehovah, when I make my complaint to you, When I speak about matters of justice with you. But why is the way of wicked ones successful, And why are the treacherous unworried?
2 You planted them, and they have taken root. They have grown and produced fruit. You are on their lips, but far away from their innermost thoughts.
3 But you know me well, O Jehovah, you see me; You have examined my heart and found it in union with you. Single them out like sheep for slaughtering, And set them apart for the day of killing.
4 How much longer should the land wither away And the vegetation of every field dry up? Because of the evil of those dwelling in it, The beasts and the birds have been swept away. For they have said: “He does not see what will happen to us.”
5 If you get tired running with footmen, How can you run a race against horses? Even if you are confident in the land of peace, How will you fare among the dense thickets along the Jordan?
6 For even your own brothers, the household of your own father, Have dealt treacherously with you. They have raised a loud cry against you. Do not put faith in them, Even if they speak good things to you.
7 “I have abandoned my house; I have deserted my inheritance. I have given my dearly beloved one into the hand of her enemies.
8 My inheritance has become to me like a lion in the forest. She has roared against me. So I have come to hate her.
9 My inheritance is like a multicolored bird of prey to me; The other birds of prey surround it and attack it. Come, gather together, all you beasts of the field, Come to eat.
10 Many shepherds have destroyed my vineyard; They have trampled my portion of land. They have turned my desirable portion of land into a desolate wilderness.
11 It has become a wasteland. It has withered; It is desolate before me. The whole land has been made desolate, But no man takes it to heart.
12 On all the worn paths through the wilderness the destroyers have come, For the sword of Jehovah is devouring from one end of the land to the other end. There is no peace for anyone.
13 They have sown wheat, but they have reaped thorns. They have worn themselves out, but to no benefit. They will be ashamed of their produce Because of the burning anger of Jehovah.”
14 This is what Jehovah says against all my wicked neighbors, who are touching the inheritance that I caused my people Israel to possess: “Here I am uprooting them from their land, and I will uproot the house of Judah from among them.
15 But after I uproot them, I will again have mercy on them and bring each of them back to his inheritance and to his land.”
16 “And if they make sure to learn the ways of my people and to swear by my name, ‘As surely as Jehovah is alive!’ just as they taught my people to swear by Baʹal, they will then be built up among my people.
17 But if they refuse to obey, I will also uproot that nation, uprooting and destroying it,” declares Jehovah.
13 This is what Jehovah told me: “Go and buy a linen belt for yourself and put it around your waist, but do not dip it in water.”
2 So I bought the belt according to the word of Jehovah and put it around my waist.
3 And the word of Jehovah came to me a second time:
4 “Take the belt that you bought and are wearing and get up, go to the Eu·phraʹtes, and hide it there in a cleft of the crag.”
5 So I went and hid it by the Eu·phraʹtes, just as Jehovah had commanded me.
6 But many days later Jehovah said to me: “Get up, go to the Eu·phraʹtes, and take from there the belt that I commanded you to hide there.”
7 So I went to the Eu·phraʹtes and dug up the belt and took it from the place where I had hidden it, and I saw that the belt had been ruined; it was completely useless.
8 Then the word of Jehovah came to me:
9 “This is what Jehovah says, ‘In the same way I will destroy the pride of Judah and the immense pride of Jerusalem.
10 These evil people who refuse to obey my words, who stubbornly follow their own heart, and who are following other gods, serving and bowing down to them, will become just like this belt that is completely useless.’
11 ‘For just as a belt clings to the waist of a man, so I made the whole house of Israel and the whole house of Judah cling to me,’ declares Jehovah, ‘to become to me a people, a name, a praise, and something beautiful. But they did not obey.’
12 “And you must also give this message to them, ‘This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: “Every large jar should be filled with wine.”’ And they will reply to you, ‘Do we not already know that every large jar should be filled with wine?’
13 Then say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Here I am filling with drunkenness all the inhabitants of this land, the kings sitting on the throne of David, the priests and the prophets, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
14 And I will smash them against each other, fathers and sons alike,” declares Jehovah. “I will not show compassion or feel any sorrow or have any mercy on them; nothing will stop me from bringing them to ruin.”’
15 Hear and pay attention. Do not be haughty, for Jehovah has spoken.
16 Give glory to Jehovah your God Before he brings darkness And before your feet stumble on the mountains at dusk. You will hope for the light, But he will bring deep shadow; He will turn it into thick gloom.
17 And if you refuse to listen, I will weep in secret because of your pride. I will shed many tears, and my eyes will stream with tears, Because the flock of Jehovah has been carried away captive.
18 Tell the king and the queen mother, ‘Sit in a lower place, For your beautiful crown will fall from your head.’
19 The cities of the south are shut, with no one to open them. All of Judah has been taken into exile, taken completely into exile.
20 Raise your eyes and see those coming from the north. Where is the flock you were given, your beautiful sheep?
21 What will you say when your punishment comes From your close friends whom you cultivated from the start? Will not birth pains seize you, like those of a woman giving birth?
22 And when you say in your heart, ‘Why have these things befallen me?’ It is because of your great error that your skirts have been stripped off And your heels have been treated violently.
23 Can a Cushʹite change his skin, or a leopard its spots? If so, then you can do good, You who are trained to do bad.
24 So I will scatter them like straw blown by the desert wind.
25 This is your lot, the portion that I have measured out to you,” declares Jehovah, “Because you have forgotten me and you trust in lies.
26 Therefore, I will lift up your skirts over your face, And your shame will be seen,
27 Your acts of adultery and your lustful neighing, Your obscene prostitution. On the hills, in the field, I have seen your disgusting behavior. Woe to you, O Jerusalem! How much longer will you remain unclean?”
14 This is the word of Jehovah that came to Jeremiah concerning the droughts:
2 Judah mourns, and its gates have faded away. They sink to the ground dejected, And a cry goes up from Jerusalem.
3 And their masters send their servants for water. They go to the water holes and find no water. They return with their vessels empty. They are ashamed and disappointed, And they cover their heads.
4 Because the ground is cracked, For there is no rain on the land, The farmers are dismayed and cover their heads.
5 Even the doe in the field forsakes her newborn Because there is no grass.
6 The wild donkeys stand on the bare hills. They pant for air like jackals; Their eyes fail because there is no vegetation.
7 Although our own errors testify against us, O Jehovah, act for the sake of your name. For our acts of unfaithfulness are many, And it is against you that we have sinned.
8 O hope of Israel, his Savior in times of distress, Why are you like a stranger in the land, Like a traveler who stops only to spend the night?
9 Why are you like a man who is stunned, Like a mighty man who cannot save? For you are among us, O Jehovah, And your name has been called on us. Do not abandon us.
10 This is what Jehovah says concerning this people: “They love to wander about; they have not restrained their feet. So Jehovah finds no pleasure in them. Now he will remember their error and call them to account for their sins.”
11 Then Jehovah said to me: “Do not pray for good to come to this people.
12 When they fast, I do not listen to their entreaties, and when they offer whole burnt offerings and grain offerings, I take no pleasure in them, for by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence, I will do away with them.”
13 At this I said: “Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah! Here the prophets are saying to them, ‘You will not see the sword, and famine will not come upon you, but I will give you true peace in this place.’”
14 Jehovah then said to me: “The prophets are prophesying lies in my name. I have not sent them or commanded them or spoken to them. A lying vision and a worthless divination and the deceit of their own heart is what they are prophesying to you.
15 Therefore this is what Jehovah says concerning the prophets who are prophesying in my name, though I did not send them, and who say that no sword or famine will occur in this land: ‘By sword and by famine those prophets will perish.
16 And the people to whom they are prophesying will be cast out into the streets of Jerusalem because of the famine and the sword, with no one to bury them—them, their wives, their sons, or their daughters—for I will pour out on them the calamity they deserve.’
17 “You must speak this word to them, ‘Let my eyes stream with tears night and day, let them not cease, For the virgin daughter of my people has been completely crushed and broken, With an extremely severe wound.
18 If I go out into the field and look, I see those slain by the sword! And if I come into the city, I see the diseases from the famine! For both the prophet and the priest have gone around in a land that they do not know.’”
19 Have you completely rejected Judah, or have you abhorred Zion? Why have you struck us, so that there is no healing for us? There was a hope for peace, but nothing good came, For a time of healing, but there is terror!
20 We acknowledge our wickedness, O Jehovah, And the error of our forefathers, For we have sinned against you.
21 For the sake of your name, do not reject us; Do not despise your glorious throne. Remember, and do not break your covenant with us.
22 Can any of the worthless idols of the nations give rain, Or can even the heavens send showers of rain on their own? Are you not the only One, O Jehovah our God? And we hope in you, For you alone have done all these things.
15 Then Jehovah said to me: “Even if Moses and Samuel were standing before me, I would show no favor toward this people. Drive them out from before me. Let them go.
2 And if they say to you, ‘Where should we go?’ you must say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Whoever is for deadly plague, to deadly plague! Whoever is for the sword, to the sword! Whoever is for the famine, to the famine! And whoever is for the captivity, to the captivity!”’
3 “‘And I will appoint over them four calamities,’ declares Jehovah, ‘the sword to kill, the dogs to drag away, and the birds of the heavens and the beasts of the earth to devour and to destroy.
4 And I will make them an object of horror to all the kingdoms of the earth because of Ma·nasʹseh the son of Hez·e·kiʹah, the king of Judah, for what he did in Jerusalem.
5 Who will show compassion to you, O Jerusalem, Who will sympathize with you, And who will stop to ask about your welfare?’
6 ‘You have deserted me,’ declares Jehovah. ‘You keep turning your back on me. So I will stretch out my hand against you and destroy you. I am tired of feeling pity for you.
7 And I will winnow them with a fork in the gates of the land. I will bereave them of children. I will destroy my people, Since they refuse to turn back from their ways.
8 Their widows will become more numerous before me than the sand of the seas. I will bring a destroyer against them at midday, against mothers and young men. I will bring agitation and terror upon them suddenly.
9 The woman who bore seven children has grown faint; She struggles for breath. Her sun has set while it is yet day, Causing shame and humiliation.’ ‘And those few remaining ones of them I will give to the sword before their enemies,’ declares Jehovah.”
10 Woe to me, O my mother, because you gave birth to me, A man subject to quarrel and strife with all the land. I have neither loaned nor borrowed; But all of them curse me.
11 Jehovah said: “I will surely minister to you for good; I will surely intercede for you in the time of calamity, In the time of distress against the enemy.
12 Can anyone break iron in pieces, Iron from the north, and copper?
13 Your resources and your treasures I will give as plunder, Not for a price, but because of all your sins throughout all your territories.
14 I will give them to your enemies To take to a land you do not know. For a fire has been ignited by my anger, And it is burning against you.”
15 You know, O Jehovah, Remember me and turn your attention to me. Take vengeance on my persecutors for me. Do not let me perish because of your slowness to anger. Know that for your sake I bear this reproach.
16 Your words were found, and I ate them; And your word became to me the exultation and the rejoicing of my heart, For your name has been called on me, O Jehovah God of armies.
17 I do not sit in the company of merrymakers and rejoice. Because your hand is upon me, I sit alone, For you have filled me with indignation.
18 Why is my pain chronic and my wound incurable? It refuses to be healed. Will you become to me like a deceptive water supply That cannot be relied on?
19 Therefore this is what Jehovah says: “If you return, then I will restore you, And you will stand before me. If you separate what is precious from what is worthless, You will become like my own mouth. They will have to turn to you, But you will not turn to them.”
20 “I am making you a fortified copper wall to this people. They will certainly fight against you, But they will not prevail against you, For I am with you, to save you and to rescue you,” declares Jehovah.
21 “And I will rescue you from the hand of the wicked And redeem you from the palm of the ruthless.”
16 The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
2 “You must not take a wife for yourself, and you must not have sons and daughters in this place.
3 For this is what Jehovah says concerning the sons and daughters who are born here and concerning their mothers who give birth to them and concerning their fathers who cause their birth in this land:
4 ‘They will die of deadly diseases, but no one will mourn them or bury them; they will become like manure on the surface of the ground. They will perish by the sword and by famine, and their dead bodies will be food for the birds of the heavens and for the beasts of the earth.’
5 For this is what Jehovah says, ‘Do not enter a house where a mourners’ feast is held, And do not go to wail or offer sympathy.’ ‘For I have taken away my peace from this people,’ declares Jehovah, ‘As well as my loyal love and mercy.
6 Both the great and the small will die in this land. They will not be buried, No one will mourn them, Nor will anyone cut himself or make himself bald for them.
7 And no one will provide food for those in mourning, To comfort them over their dead; Nor will anyone give them the cup of consolation To drink over the loss of their father or mother.
8 And do not enter a house of feasting To sit down with them to eat and drink.’
9 “For this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Here in this place, in your days and before your very eyes, I will put an end to the sounds of exultation and rejoicing, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride.’
10 “When you tell this people all these words, they will ask you, ‘Why has Jehovah spoken of all this great calamity against us? What error and what sin have we committed against Jehovah our God?’
11 You must reply to them, ‘“Because your forefathers abandoned me,” declares Jehovah, “and they kept following other gods and serving them and bowing down to them. But me they abandoned, and my law they did not keep.
12 And you have behaved far worse than your forefathers, and each one of you follows the stubbornness of his wicked heart instead of obeying me.
13 So I will hurl you out of this land into a land that neither you nor your forefathers have known, and there you will have to serve other gods day and night, because I will show you no favor.”’
14 “‘However, the days are coming,’ declares Jehovah, ‘when they will no longer say: “As surely as Jehovah is alive, who brought the people of Israel out of the land of Egypt!”
15 but rather: “As surely as Jehovah is alive, who brought the people of Israel from the land of the north and from all the lands to which he had dispersed them!” and I will bring them back to their land, which I gave to their forefathers.’
16 ‘Here I am sending for many fishermen,’ declares Jehovah, ‘And they will fish for them. After that I will send for many hunters, And they will hunt them down on every mountain and every hill And out of the clefts of the crags.
17 For my eyes are on everything they do. They have not been hidden from before me, Nor has their error been hidden from my eyes.
18 First, I will repay the full amount due for their error and their sin, For they have profaned my land with the lifeless figures of their disgusting idols And have filled my inheritance with their detestable things.’”
19 O Jehovah, my strength and my stronghold, My place to flee in the day of distress, To you the nations will come from the ends of the earth, And they will say: “Our forefathers inherited utter falsehood, Futility and useless things of no benefit.”
20 Can a man make gods for himself When they are not really gods?
21 “So I will make them know, At this time I will make them know my power and my might, And they will have to know that my name is Jehovah.”
17 “The sin of Judah is written down with an iron stylus. With a diamond point it is engraved on the tablet of their heart And on the horns of their altars,
2 While their sons remember their altars and their sacred poles Beside a luxuriant tree, on the high hills,
3 On the mountains in the open countryside. Your resources, all your treasures, I will give as plunder —Yes, your high places because of sin throughout your territories.
4 You will forfeit, of your own accord, your inheritance that I gave you. And I will make you serve your enemies in a land you do not know, For you have kindled my anger like a fire. It will burn for all time.”
5 This is what Jehovah says: “Cursed is the man who puts his trust in mere humans, Who relies on human power, And whose heart turns away from Jehovah.
6 He will become like a solitary tree in the desert. He will not see when good comes, But he will reside in parched places in the wilderness, In a salt land where no one can live.
7 Blessed is the man who puts his trust in Jehovah, Whose confidence is in Jehovah.
8 He will become like a tree planted by the waters, That sends out its roots to the stream. He will not notice when heat comes, But his leaves will always flourish. And in the year of drought he will not be anxious, Nor will he quit producing fruit.
9 The heart is more treacherous than anything else and is desperate. Who can know it?
10 I, Jehovah, am searching the heart, Examining the innermost thoughts, To give to each one according to his ways, According to the fruitage of his works.
11 Like a partridge that gathers what it has not laid, So is the one who acquires riches dishonestly. They will leave him in midlife, And in the end he will prove senseless.”
12 A glorious throne, exalted from the beginning, Is the place of our sanctuary.
13 O Jehovah, the hope of Israel, All those who abandon you will be put to shame. Those apostatizing from you will be written in the dust, Because they have abandoned Jehovah, the source of living water.
14 Heal me, O Jehovah, and I will be healed. Save me, and I will be saved, For you are the object of my praise.
15 Look! There are those saying to me: “Where is the word of Jehovah? Let it come, please!”
16 But as for me, I did not run away from following you as a shepherd, Nor did I long for the day of disaster. You well know everything my lips have spoken; It all took place before your face!
17 Do not be a cause of terror to me. You are my refuge in the day of calamity.
18 Let my persecutors be put to shame, But do not let me be put to shame. Let them be struck with terror, But do not let me be struck with terror. Bring the day of calamity on them, And crush them and destroy them completely.
19 This is what Jehovah told me: “Go and stand in the gate of the sons of the people by which the kings of Judah go in and out, and in all the gates of Jerusalem.
20 You must say to them, ‘Hear the word of Jehovah, you kings of Judah, all people of Judah, and all inhabitants of Jerusalem, who enter by these gates.
21 This is what Jehovah says: “Watch yourselves, and do not carry any load on the Sabbath day or bring it in through the gates of Jerusalem.
22 You must not bring any load out of your homes on the Sabbath day; and you must do no work at all. Keep the Sabbath day sacred, just as I commanded your forefathers.
23 But they did not listen or incline their ear, and they stubbornly refused to obey or to accept discipline.”’
24 “‘“However, if you strictly obey me,” declares Jehovah, “and you bring in no load through the gates of this city on the Sabbath day, and you keep the Sabbath day sacred by not doing any work on it,
25 then kings and princes who sit on the throne of David will also enter in through the gates of this city, riding in the chariot and on horses, they and their princes, the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and this city will be inhabited for all time.
26 And people will come from the cities of Judah, from the places around Jerusalem, from the land of Benjamin, from the lowland, from the mountainous region, and from the Negʹeb, bringing whole burnt offerings, sacrifices, grain offerings, frankincense, and thanksgiving sacrifices into the house of Jehovah.
27 “‘“But if you do not obey me by keeping the Sabbath day sacred and by not carrying loads and bringing them through the gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day, I will set her gates on fire, and it will certainly consume the fortified towers of Jerusalem and will not be extinguished.”’”
18 This is the word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah:
2 “Rise up and go down to the house of the potter, and there I will cause you to hear my words.”
3 So I went down to the house of the potter, and he was working on the potter’s wheels.
4 But the vessel that the potter was making with the clay was spoiled in his hand. So the potter reworked it into another vessel, just as he saw fit.
5 Then the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
6 “‘Can I not do to you just as this potter did, O house of Israel?’ declares Jehovah. ‘Look! As the clay in the hand of the potter, so are you in my hand, O house of Israel.
7 Whenever I may speak about uprooting and pulling down and destroying a nation or a kingdom,
8 and that nation abandons its wickedness that I spoke against, I will also change my mind concerning the calamity that I intended to bring against it.
9 But whenever I speak about building up and planting a nation or a kingdom,
10 and it does what is bad in my eyes and does not obey my voice, I will change my mind concerning the good that I intended to do for it.’
11 “Now say, please, to the men of Judah and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Here I am preparing a calamity and devising a scheme against you. Turn back, please, from your bad ways, and reform your ways and your practices.”’”
12 But they said: “It is hopeless! For we will walk after our own thoughts, and each of us will act according to the stubbornness of his wicked heart.”
13 Therefore this is what Jehovah says: “Ask for yourselves, please, among the nations. Who has heard anything like this? The virgin of Israel has done a most horrible thing.
14 Does the snow of Lebʹa·non disappear from the rocks on its slopes? Or will cool waters flowing from afar dry up?
15 But my people have forgotten me. For they make sacrifices to something worthless, And they make men stumble in their ways, the ancient paths, To walk on back roads that are not smooth and level,
16 In order to make their land an object of horror And something to whistle at forever. Every last one passing by it will stare in horror and shake his head.
17 Like the east wind, I will scatter them before the enemy. I will show them my back, not my face, in the day of their disaster.”
18 And they said: “Come, let us devise a plot against Jeremiah, for the law will not perish from our priests or counsel from the wise men or the word from the prophets. Come and let us speak against him and pay no attention to what he says.”
19 Do pay attention to me, O Jehovah, And listen to what my opponents are saying.
20 Should good be repaid with bad? For they have dug a pit for my life. Remember how I stood before you to speak good about them, To turn your wrath away from them.
21 So give their sons over to the famine, And hand them over to the power of the sword. May their wives become bereaved of children and widowed. May their men be killed with deadly plague, Their young men struck down with the sword in battle.
22 Let a cry be heard from their houses When you bring marauders on them suddenly. For they have dug a pit to capture me And have laid traps for my feet.
23 But you, O Jehovah, Well know all their schemes against me to kill me. Do not cover their error, And do not wipe out their sin from before you. Let them stumble before you When you take action against them in your anger.
19 This is what Jehovah said: “Go and buy an earthenware flask from a potter. Take some of the elders of the people and some of the elders of the priests,
2 and go out to the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom, at the entrance of the Gate of the Potsherds. And there proclaim the words that I speak to you.
3 You will say, ‘Hear the word of Jehovah, you kings of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem. This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “‘“I am about to bring a calamity on this place, and the ears of anyone who hears about it will tingle.
4 It is because they abandoned me and made this place unrecognizable. In it they are sacrificing to other gods, whom they and their forefathers and the kings of Judah had not known, and they have filled this place with the blood of the innocent ones.
5 They built the high places of Baʹal in order to burn their sons in the fire as whole burnt offerings to Baʹal, something that I had not commanded or spoken of and that had never even come into my heart.”’
6 “‘“Therefore look! the days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when this place will no longer be called Toʹpheth or the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom but the Valley of the Slaughter.
7 I will thwart the plans of Judah and Jerusalem in this place, and I will make them fall by the sword before their enemies and by the hand of those seeking to take their life. And I will give their dead bodies as food to the birds of the heavens and to the beasts of the earth.
8 And I will make this city an object of horror and something to whistle at. Every last one passing by it will stare in horror and whistle over all its plagues.
9 And I will make them eat the flesh of their sons and daughters, and they will each eat the flesh of his fellow man, because of the siege and their desperation when they are hemmed in by their enemies and those seeking to take their life.”’
10 “Then break the flask before the eyes of the men who go with you,
11 and say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “This is how I will break this people and this city, like someone who breaks a potter’s vessel so that it can never be repaired; and they will bury the dead in Toʹpheth until there is no more room to bury them.”’
12 “‘That is what I will do to this place,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and to its inhabitants, to make this city like Toʹpheth.
13 And the houses of Jerusalem and the houses of the kings of Judah will become unclean like this place, Toʹpheth, yes, all the houses on whose roofs they offered sacrifices to all the army of the heavens and where they poured out drink offerings to other gods.’”
14 When Jeremiah returned from Toʹpheth where Jehovah sent him to prophesy, he stood in the courtyard of the house of Jehovah and said to all the people:
15 “This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Here I am bringing on this city and on all its towns all the calamity that I have spoken against it, because they stubbornly refused to obey my words.’”
20 Now Pashʹhur the son of Imʹmer, the priest, who was also the leading commissioner in the house of Jehovah, was listening when Jeremiah prophesied these things.
2 Then Pashʹhur struck Jeremiah the prophet and put him in the stocks that were at the Upper Gate of Benjamin, which was in the house of Jehovah.
3 But on the following day when Pashʹhur released Jeremiah from the stocks, Jeremiah said to him: “Jehovah has named you, not Pashʹhur, but Terror All Around.
4 For this is what Jehovah says, ‘I will make you an object of terror to yourself and to all your friends, and they will fall by the sword of their enemies while your eyes are looking on; and I will give all Judah into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will take them into exile in Babylon and put them to death by the sword.
5 And I will give all the wealth of this city, all its resources, all its precious things, and all the treasures of the kings of Judah into the hand of their enemies. And they will plunder them and seize them and take them to Babylon.
6 And as for you, Pashʹhur, and all who live in your house, you will go into captivity. You will go off to Babylon and die there, and you will be buried there with all your friends, because you have prophesied lies to them.’”
7 You have fooled me, O Jehovah, and I was fooled. You used your strength against me, and you prevailed. I have become a laughingstock all day long; Everyone ridicules me.
8 For whenever I speak, I must cry out and proclaim, “Violence and destruction!” For me the word of Jehovah has been the cause of insults and jeering all day long.
9 So I said: “I am not going to make mention of him, And I will speak no more in his name.” But in my heart it became like a burning fire shut up in my bones, And I was tired of holding it in; I could no longer endure it.
10 For I heard many evil rumors; Terror surrounded me. “Denounce him; let us denounce him!” Every man wishing me peace was watching for my downfall: “Perhaps he will make a foolish mistake, And we can prevail and take our revenge against him.”
11 But Jehovah was with me like a fearsome warrior. That is why those persecuting me will stumble and will not prevail. They will be put to great shame, for they will not succeed. Their everlasting humiliation will not be forgotten.
12 But you, O Jehovah of armies, are examining the righteous one; You see the innermost thoughts and the heart. Let me see your vengeance on them, For to you I have committed my legal case.
13 Sing to Jehovah! Praise Jehovah! For he has rescued the poor one from the hand of evildoers.
14 Cursed be the day I was born! May the day my mother gave birth to me not be blessed!
15 Cursed be the man who brought good news to my father, saying: “A son has been born to you, a boy!” Making him rejoice greatly.
16 May that man become like cities that Jehovah overthrew without regret. May he hear an outcry in the morning and the sound of alarm at midday.
17 Why did he not put me to death in the womb, So that my mother would become my burial place And her womb would always remain pregnant?
18 Why did I have to come out of the womb To see trouble and grief, To end my days in shame?
21 Jeremiah received the word from Jehovah when King Zed·e·kiʹah sent to him Pashʹhur son of Mal·chiʹjah and Zeph·a·niʹah son of Ma·a·seiʹah, the priest, requesting:
2 “Please inquire of Jehovah in our behalf, because King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon is waging war against us. Perhaps Jehovah will perform one of his wonderful works in our behalf, so that he will withdraw from us.”
3 Jeremiah said to them: “This is what you should say to Zed·e·kiʹah,
4 ‘This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: “Here I am turning around against you the weapons of war that are in your own hands, with which you are fighting the king of Babylon and the Chal·deʹans who are outside the wall besieging you. And I will gather them into the middle of this city.
5 And I myself will fight against you with an outstretched hand and a mighty arm, with anger and wrath and great indignation.
6 I will strike the inhabitants of this city, both man and beast. By a great pestilence they will die.”’
7 “‘“And after that,” declares Jehovah, “I will give King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah and his servants and the people of this city—those who survive the pestilence, the sword, and the famine—into the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those who are seeking to take their life. He will strike them down with the sword. He will not feel sorry for them, nor will he show compassion or have any mercy.”’
8 “And to this people you should say, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Here I am putting before you the way of life and the way of death.
9 Those who remain in this city will die by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence. But whoever goes out and surrenders to the Chal·deʹans who are besieging you will keep living, and he will have his life as a spoil.”’
10 “‘“For I have set my face against this city for calamity and not for good,” declares Jehovah. “It will be given into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will burn it with fire.”
11 “‘To the household of the king of Judah: Hear the word of Jehovah.
12 O house of David, this is what Jehovah says: “Uphold justice every morning, And rescue the one being robbed from the hand of the defrauder, So that my wrath does not blaze like a fire And burn with no one to extinguish it Because of your evil deeds.”’
13 ‘Here I am against you, O inhabitant of the valley, O rock of the level land,’ declares Jehovah. ‘As for you who say: “Who will come down against us? And who will invade our dwellings?”
14 I will hold an accounting against you As your deeds deserve,’ declares Jehovah. ‘And I will set her forest ablaze, And it will consume all the things around her.’”
22 This is what Jehovah says: “Go down to the house of the king of Judah, and deliver this message.
2 You must say, ‘Hear the word of Jehovah, O king of Judah who sits on the throne of David, you with your servants and your people, those who enter through these gates.
3 This is what Jehovah says: “Uphold justice and righteousness. Rescue the one being robbed from the hand of the defrauder. Do not mistreat any foreign resident, and do not harm any fatherless child or widow. And do not shed any innocent blood in this place.
4 For if you are careful to carry out this word, then the kings who sit on the throne of David will enter through the gates of this house, riding in chariots and on horses, they with their servants and their people.”’
5 “‘But if you will not obey these words, by myself I do swear,’ declares Jehovah, ‘that this house will become a devastated place.’
6 “For this is what Jehovah says concerning the house of the king of Judah, ‘You are as Gilʹe·ad to me, Like the summit of Lebʹa·non. But I will make you a wilderness; Not one of your cities will be inhabited.
7 And I will appoint destroyers against you, Each with his weapons. They will cut down your choicest cedars And make them fall into the fire.
8 “‘And many nations will pass by this city and say to one another: “Why did Jehovah do this to this great city?”
9 And they will reply: “Because they abandoned the covenant of Jehovah their God and bowed down to other gods and served them.”’
10 Do not weep for the dead one, And do not sympathize with him. Instead, weep profusely for the one going away, For he will return no more to see the land of his birth.
11 “For this is what Jehovah says concerning Shalʹlum son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah who is reigning instead of his father Jo·siʹah and who has gone out of this place: ‘He will return there no more.
12 For he will die in the place where they have taken him into exile, and he will see this land no more.’
13 Woe to the one who builds his house without righteousness And his upper rooms without justice, Who makes his fellow man serve him for nothing, Whose wages he refuses to pay;
14 The one saying, ‘I will build for myself a roomy house With spacious upper rooms. I will fit it with windows And panel it with cedar and paint it with vermilion.’
15 Will you continue reigning because you outdo others in your use of cedar? Your father also ate and drank, But he upheld justice and righteousness, And it went well with him.
16 He defended the legal claim of the afflicted one and the poor one, So that it went well. ‘Is that not what it means to know me?’ declares Jehovah.
17 ‘But your eyes and heart are set only on your dishonest gain, On shedding innocent blood, And on committing fraud and extortion.’
18 “Therefore this is what Jehovah says concerning Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, ‘They will not mourn him: “Alas, my brother! Alas, my sister!” They will not mourn him: “Alas, O master! Alas, his majesty!”
19 With the burial of a donkey he will be buried, Dragged about and thrown away, Outside the gates of Jerusalem.’
20 Go up to Lebʹa·non and cry out, Raise your voice in Baʹshan, And cry out from Abʹa·rim, For all your passionate lovers have been crushed.
21 I spoke to you when you felt secure. But you said, ‘I will not obey.’ This has been your course since youth, For you have not obeyed my voice.
22 A wind will shepherd all your shepherds, And your passionate lovers will go into captivity. Then you will be put to shame and humiliated because of all your calamity.
23 O you who dwell in Lebʹa·non, Nestled among the cedars, How you will groan when pangs come on you, Anguish like that of a woman giving birth!”
24 “‘As surely as I am alive,’ declares Jehovah, ‘even if Co·niʹah son of Je·hoiʹa·kim, the king of Judah, were the seal ring on my right hand, I would pull you off from there!
25 I will give you into the hand of those seeking to take your life, into the hand of those whom you fear, into the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, and into the hand of the Chal·deʹans.
26 And I will hurl you and your mother who gave birth to you into another land where you were not born, and there you will die.
27 And they will never return to the land they yearn for.
28 Is this man Co·niʹah just a despised, broken pot, A vessel that nobody wants? Why are he and his descendants hurled down And thrown into a land they do not know?’
29 O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of Jehovah.
30 This is what Jehovah says: ‘Write down this man as childless, As a man who will not have any success during his lifetime, For none of his descendants will succeed In sitting on David’s throne and ruling again in Judah.’”
23 “Woe to the shepherds who are destroying and scattering the sheep of my pasture!” declares Jehovah.
2 Therefore this is what Jehovah the God of Israel says against the shepherds who are shepherding my people: “You have scattered my sheep; you kept dispersing them, and you have not turned your attention to them.” “So I will turn my attention to you because of your evil deeds,” declares Jehovah.
3 “Then I will gather together the remnant of my sheep from all the lands to which I have dispersed them, and I will bring them back to their pasture, and they will be fruitful and become many.
4 And I will raise up over them shepherds who will really shepherd them. They will no longer be afraid or be terrified, and none will be missing,” declares Jehovah.
5 “Look! The days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when I will raise up to David a righteous sprout. And a king will reign and show insight and uphold justice and righteousness in the land.
6 In his days Judah will be saved, and Israel will reside in security. And this is the name by which he will be called: Jehovah Is Our Righteousness.”
7 “However, the days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when they will no longer say, ‘As surely as Jehovah is alive, who brought the people of Israel out of the land of Egypt!’
8 but rather, ‘As surely as Jehovah is alive, who brought out and brought back the descendants of the house of Israel from the land of the north and from all the lands to which I had dispersed them,’ and they will dwell in their own land.”
9 Concerning the prophets: My heart is broken within me. All my bones are shaking. I am like a man who is drunk And like a man overcome by wine, Because of Jehovah and because of his holy words.
10 For the land is full of adulterers; Because of the curse the land has gone into mourning And the pastures of the wilderness have dried up. Their course is evil, and they abuse their power.
11 “Both the prophet and the priest are polluted. Even in my own house I have found their wickedness,” declares Jehovah.
12 “So their path will become slippery and dark; They will be pushed and will fall. For I will bring calamity on them In the year of reckoning,” declares Jehovah.
13 “And in the prophets of Sa·marʹi·a I have seen what is repulsive. Their prophecies are incited by Baʹal, And they lead my people Israel astray.
14 And in the prophets of Jerusalem I have seen horrible things. They commit adultery and walk in falsehood; They encourage evildoers, And they do not turn away from their wickedness. To me they are all like Sodʹom, And her inhabitants are like Go·morʹrah.”
15 Therefore this is what Jehovah of armies says against the prophets: “Here I am making them eat wormwood And giving them poisoned water to drink. For from the prophets of Jerusalem apostasy has spread throughout the land.”
16 This is what Jehovah of armies says: “Do not listen to the words of the prophets who are prophesying to you. They are deluding you. The vision they speak is from their own heart, Not from the mouth of Jehovah.
17 They are saying again and again to those who disrespect me, ‘Jehovah has said: “You will enjoy peace.”’ And to everyone who follows his own stubborn heart they say, ‘No calamity will come upon you.’
18 For who has stood in the inner circle of Jehovah To see and hear his word? Who has paid attention to his word in order to hear it?
19 Look! The windstorm of Jehovah will burst out in fury; Like a whirling tempest it will whirl down on the head of the wicked.
20 The anger of Jehovah will not turn back Until he has carried out and accomplished the intentions of his heart. In the final part of the days you will clearly understand this.
21 I did not send the prophets, yet they ran. I did not speak to them, yet they prophesied.
22 But if they had stood in my inner circle, They would have made my people hear my words And would have caused them to turn back from their bad way and their evil deeds.”
23 “Am I only a God nearby,” declares Jehovah, “and not a God also from far away?”
24 “Can any man hide in a concealed place where I cannot see him?” declares Jehovah. “Do I not fill the heavens and the earth?” declares Jehovah.
25 “I have heard the prophets who are prophesying lies in my name say, ‘I had a dream! I had a dream!’
26 How long will this continue in the heart of the prophets, to prophesy lies? They are prophets of the deceit of their own heart.
27 They intend to make my people forget my name by the dreams they relate to one another, just as their fathers forgot my name because of Baʹal.
28 Let the prophet who has a dream relate the dream, but the one who has my word should speak my word truthfully.” “What does the straw have in common with the grain?” declares Jehovah.
29 “Is not my word just like a fire,” declares Jehovah, “and like a forge hammer that smashes the crag?”
30 “So here I am against the prophets,” declares Jehovah, “who steal my words from one another.”
31 “Here I am against the prophets,” declares Jehovah, “those who use their tongue to say, ‘He declares!’”
32 “Here I am against the prophets of lying dreams,” declares Jehovah, “who relate them and lead my people astray because of their lies and their boasting.” “But I did not send them or command them. So they will not benefit this people at all,” declares Jehovah.
33 “And when this people or a prophet or a priest asks you, ‘What is the burden of Jehovah?’ you should reply to them, ‘“You people are the burden! And I will cast you off,” declares Jehovah.’
34 As for the prophet or the priest or the people who say, ‘This is the burden of Jehovah!’ I will turn my attention on that man and on his household.
35 This is what each of you is saying to his fellow and to his brother, ‘What has Jehovah answered? And what has Jehovah spoken?’
36 But the burden of Jehovah you should mention no more, for the burden is each one’s own word, and you have changed the words of the living God, Jehovah of armies, our God.
37 “This is what you will say to the prophet, ‘What answer has Jehovah given you? And what has Jehovah spoken?
38 And if you keep saying, “The burden of Jehovah!” this is what Jehovah says: “Because of your saying, ‘This word is the burden of Jehovah,’ after I told you, ‘You must not say: “The burden of Jehovah!”’
39 look! I will lift you up and throw you away from my presence, both you and the city that I gave to you and your forefathers.
40 And I will bring on you everlasting disgrace and everlasting humiliation, which will not be forgotten.”’”
24 Then Jehovah showed me two baskets of figs set before the temple of Jehovah, after King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon had carried into exile Jec·o·niʹah son of Je·hoiʹa·kim, the king of Judah, along with the princes of Judah, the craftsmen, and the metalworkers; he took them from Jerusalem to Babylon.
2 One basket had very good figs, like early figs, but the other basket had very bad figs, so bad that they could not be eaten.
3 Jehovah then asked me: “What do you see, Jeremiah?” So I said: “Figs; the good figs are very good, but the bad ones are very bad, so bad that they cannot be eaten.”
4 Then the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
5 “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘Like these good figs, so I will regard in a good way the exiles of Judah, whom I have sent away from this place to the land of the Chal·deʹans.
6 I will keep my eye on them for their good, and I will cause them to return to this land. I will build them up, and I will not tear down; I will plant them, and I will not uproot.
7 And I will give them a heart to know me, that I am Jehovah. They will become my people, and I will become their God, for they will return to me with all their heart.
8 “‘But concerning the bad figs that are so bad they cannot be eaten, this is what Jehovah says: “So I will regard King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah, his princes, the remnant of Jerusalem who are left in this land, and those who are dwelling in the land of Egypt.
9 I will make them an object of horror and calamity to all the kingdoms of the earth, a reproach, a proverbial saying, a cause for ridicule, and a curse in all the places to which I disperse them.
10 And I will send against them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, until they have perished from the land that I gave to them and to their forefathers.”’”
26 In the beginning of the reign of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, this word came from Jehovah:
2 “This is what Jehovah says, ‘Stand in the courtyard of the house of Jehovah and speak concerning all the people of the cities of Judah who are coming in to worship at the house of Jehovah. Tell them everything that I command you; do not take away a word.
3 Perhaps they will listen and each one will turn back from his evil way, and I will change my mind concerning the calamity that I intend to bring on them because of their evil deeds.
4 Say to them: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘If you will not listen to me by following my law that I have placed before you,
5 by listening to the words of my servants the prophets, whom I am sending to you again and again, whom you have not listened to,
6 then I will make this house like Shiʹloh, and I will make this city an object of cursing to all the nations of the earth.’”’”
7 And the priests and the prophets and all the people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of Jehovah.
8 So when Jeremiah had finished speaking all that Jehovah had commanded him to speak to all the people, then the priests and the prophets and all the people seized him and said: “You will surely die.
9 Why have you prophesied in the name of Jehovah, saying, ‘This house will become like Shiʹloh, and this city will be devastated and left without an inhabitant’?” And all the people gathered around Jeremiah in the house of Jehovah.
10 When the princes of Judah heard these words, they came up from the house of the king to the house of Jehovah and sat down at the entrance of the new gate of Jehovah.
11 The priests and the prophets said to the princes and to all the people: “This man deserves the death penalty, because he has prophesied against this city just as you have heard with your own ears.”
12 Jeremiah then said to all the princes and to all the people: “It was Jehovah who sent me to prophesy against this house and against this city all the words that you have heard.
13 So now, reform your ways and your actions and obey the voice of Jehovah your God, and Jehovah will change his mind concerning the calamity that he has spoken against you.
14 But as for me, I am in your hand. Do to me whatever seems good and right in your eyes.
15 Only know for certain that if you put me to death, you will bring innocent blood upon yourselves and upon this city and upon her inhabitants, for in truth Jehovah sent me to you to speak all these words in your hearing.”
16 Then the princes and all the people said to the priests and the prophets: “This man does not deserve the death penalty, for he spoke to us in the name of Jehovah our God.”
17 Furthermore, some of the elders of the land rose up and began saying to the entire congregation of the people:
18 “Miʹcah of Moʹresh·eth was prophesying in the days of King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah, and he said to all the people of Judah, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “Zion will be plowed up as a field, Jerusalem will become heaps of ruins, And the mountain of the House will become like high places in a forest.”’
19 “Did King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah and all Judah then put him to death? Did he not fear Jehovah and beg for Jehovah’s favor, so that Jehovah changed his mind concerning the calamity that he had spoken against them? So we are about to bring a great calamity on ourselves.
20 “And there was another man prophesying in the name of Jehovah, U·riʹjah son of She·maiʹah from Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, who prophesied against this city and against this land with words like those of Jeremiah.
21 King Je·hoiʹa·kim and all his mighty men and all the princes heard his words, and the king sought to put him to death. When U·riʹjah heard of it, he at once became afraid and fled to Egypt.
22 Then King Je·hoiʹa·kim sent El·naʹthan the son of Achʹbor and other men with him to Egypt.
23 They brought U·riʹjah from Egypt and took him to King Je·hoiʹa·kim, who then struck him down with the sword and cast his dead body into the graveyard of the common people.”
24 But A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan supported Jeremiah, so that he was not handed over to the people to be put to death.
27 In the beginning of the reign of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from Jehovah:
2 “This is what Jehovah has told me, ‘Make for yourself straps and yoke bars, and put them on your neck.
3 Then send them to the king of Eʹdom, the king of Moʹab, the king of the Amʹmon·ites, the king of Tyre, and the king of Siʹdon by the hand of the messengers who have come to Jerusalem to King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah.
4 Give them this command for their masters: “‘“This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says; this is what you should say to your masters,
5 ‘It is I who made the earth, mankind, and the beasts that are on the surface of the earth by my great power and by my outstretched arm; and I have given it to whomever I please.
6 And now I have given all these lands into the hand of my servant King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon; even the wild beasts of the field I have given him to serve him.
7 All the nations will serve him and his son and his grandson until the time for his own land comes, when many nations and great kings will make him their slave.’
8 “‘“‘If any nation or kingdom refuses to serve King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon and refuses to put its neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, I will punish that nation with the sword, with famine, and with pestilence,’ declares Jehovah, ‘until I have finished them off by his hand.’
9 “‘“‘Therefore, do not listen to your prophets, your diviners, your dreamers, your magicians, and your sorcerers, who are saying to you: “You will not serve the king of Babylon.”
10 For they are prophesying lies to you, so that you will be taken far away from your land and I will disperse you and you will perish.
11 “‘“‘But the nation that brings its neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon and serves him, I will allow to remain on its land,’ declares Jehovah, ‘to cultivate it and dwell in it.’”’”
12 Also to King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah I spoke in the same way, saying: “Bring your necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon and serve him and his people, and you will keep living.
13 Why should you and your people die by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence, as Jehovah has said about the nation that will not serve the king of Babylon?
14 Do not listen to the words of the prophets who are saying to you, ‘You will not serve the king of Babylon,’ because they are prophesying lies to you.
15 “‘For I have not sent them,’ declares Jehovah, ‘but they are prophesying lies in my name, with the result that I will disperse you and you will perish, you and the prophets who are prophesying to you.’”
16 And to the priests and to all this people I said: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘Do not listen to the words of your prophets who are prophesying to you: “Look! The utensils of the house of Jehovah will be brought back from Babylon very soon!” for they are prophesying lies to you.
17 Do not listen to them. Serve the king of Babylon and you will keep living. Why should this city become a ruin?
18 But if they are prophets and if the word of Jehovah is with them, please let them beg Jehovah of armies that the remaining utensils in the house of Jehovah, in the house of the king of Judah, and in Jerusalem may not be taken away to Babylon.’
19 “For this is what Jehovah of armies says concerning the pillars, the Sea, the carriages, and the remaining utensils that are left in this city,
20 which King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon did not take when he took into exile Jec·o·niʹah son of Je·hoiʹa·kim, the king of Judah, from Jerusalem to Babylon, together with all the nobles of Judah and Jerusalem;
21 yes, this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says concerning the utensils that are left at the house of Jehovah, in the house of the king of Judah, and in Jerusalem:
22 ‘“To Babylon they will be brought, and there they will remain until the day I turn my attention to them,” declares Jehovah. “Then I will bring them back and restore them to this place.”’”
28 In that same year, in the beginning of the reign of King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah, in the fourth year, in the fifth month, the prophet Han·a·niʹah the son of Azʹzur from Gibʹe·on said to me in the house of Jehovah in the presence of the priests and all the people:
2 “This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon.
3 Within two years I am bringing back to this place all the utensils of the house of Jehovah that King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon took from this place and brought to Babylon.’”
4 “‘And I will bring back to this place Jec·o·niʹah son of Je·hoiʹa·kim, the king of Judah, and all the exiles of Judah who have gone to Babylon,’ declares Jehovah, ‘for I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon.’”
5 Then Jeremiah the prophet spoke to Han·a·niʹah the prophet in the presence of the priests and all the people who were standing in the house of Jehovah.
6 Jeremiah the prophet said: “Amen! May Jehovah do this! May Jehovah fulfill your words that you prophesied by bringing back from Babylon to this place the utensils of the house of Jehovah and all the exiled people!
7 However, hear, please, this message that I am speaking in your ears and in the ears of all the people.
8 Long ago the prophets who were prior to me and prior to you used to prophesy concerning many lands and great kingdoms, about war, calamity, and pestilence.
9 If a prophet prophesies about peace and the word of that prophet comes true, then it will be known that Jehovah truly sent that prophet.”
10 At that Han·a·niʹah the prophet took the yoke bar off the neck of the prophet Jeremiah and broke it.
11 Han·a·niʹah then said in the presence of all the people: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘Just like this I will break the yoke of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon from off the neck of all the nations within two years.’” And Jeremiah the prophet went on his way.
12 After Han·a·niʹah the prophet had broken the yoke bar from off the neck of Jeremiah the prophet, this message of Jehovah came to Jeremiah:
13 “Go and say to Han·a·niʹah, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “You have broken yoke bars of wood, but instead of them you will make yoke bars of iron.”
14 For this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “I will put an iron yoke bar on the neck of all these nations, to serve King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, and they must serve him. Even the wild beasts of the field I will give him.”’”
15 Jeremiah the prophet then said to Han·a·niʹah the prophet: “Listen, please, O Han·a·niʹah! Jehovah has not sent you, but you have caused this people to trust in a lie.
16 Therefore this is what Jehovah says, ‘Look! I am removing you from the face of the ground. This year you will die, for you have urged rebellion against Jehovah.’”
17 So Han·a·niʹah the prophet died in that year, in the seventh month.
30 The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:
2 “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘Write in a book all the words that I speak to you.
3 For “look! the days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when I will gather the captives of my people, Israel and Judah,” says Jehovah, “and I will bring them back to the land that I gave to their forefathers, and they will possess it once again.”’”
4 These are the words that Jehovah spoke to Israel and Judah.
5 This is what Jehovah says: “We have heard the sounds of trembling; There is terror, and no peace.
6 Ask, please, whether a man can give birth. Why, then, do I see every strong man with his hands on his stomach Like a woman giving birth? Why has every face turned pale?
7 Alas! For that day is a terrible one. There is none like it, A time of distress for Jacob. But he will be saved out of it.”
8 “And in that day,” declares Jehovah of armies, “I will break the yoke from off your neck, and your straps I will tear in two; and no more will strangers make him their slave.
9 They will serve Jehovah their God and David their king, whom I will raise up for them.”
10 “And you, my servant Jacob, do not be afraid,” declares Jehovah, “And do not be terrified, O Israel. For I will save you from far away And your offspring from the land of their captivity. Jacob will return and be calm and undisturbed, With no one to make them afraid.”
11 “For I am with you,” declares Jehovah, “to save you. But I will make an extermination among all the nations to which I scattered you; However, you I will not exterminate. I will discipline you to the proper degree, And I will by no means leave you unpunished.”
12 For this is what Jehovah says: “There is no cure for your breakdown. Your wound is incurable.
13 There is no one to plead your cause, No means of healing your ulcer. There is no cure for you.
14 All your passionate lovers have forgotten you. They no longer seek you out. For with the stroke of an enemy I have struck you, With the punishment of someone cruel, Because of your great guilt and your many sins.
15 Why do you cry out because of your breakdown? Your pain is incurable! Because of your great guilt and your many sins I have done this to you.
16 Therefore all those devouring you will be devoured, And all your enemies will also go into captivity. Those pillaging you will be pillaged, And I will hand all those plundering you over to plundering.”
17 “But I will restore your health and heal your wounds,” declares Jehovah, “Though they called you an outcast: ‘Zion, for whom no one searches.’”
18 This is what Jehovah says: “Here I am gathering the captives of the tents of Jacob, And I will have pity for his tabernacles. The city will be rebuilt on her mound, And the fortified tower will stand on its rightful site.
19 And from them will come thanksgiving and the sounds of laughter. I will multiply them, and they will not be few; I will make them numerous, And they will not be insignificant.
20 His sons will become as in the past, And before me his assembly will be firmly established. I will deal with all his oppressors.
21 His majestic one will be one of his own, And from his midst his ruler will emerge. I will cause him to come near, and he will approach me.” “For otherwise, who would dare to approach me?” declares Jehovah.
22 “And you will become my people, and I will be your God.”
23 Look! A windstorm of Jehovah will burst out in fury, A sweeping tempest that whirls down on the head of the wicked.
24 The burning anger of Jehovah will not turn back Until he has carried out and accomplished the intentions of his heart. In the final part of the days you will understand this.
31 “At that time,” declares Jehovah, “I will become God to all the families of Israel, and they will become my people.”
2 This is what Jehovah says: “The people who survived the sword found favor in the wilderness When Israel was walking to his resting-place.”
3 From far away Jehovah appeared to me and said: “I have loved you with an everlasting love. That is why I have drawn you to me with loyal love.
4 Yet again I will rebuild you and you will be rebuilt. O virgin of Israel, you will again take up your tambourines And go forth dancing joyfully.
5 You will again plant vineyards in the mountains of Sa·marʹi·a; The planters will plant and enjoy their fruit.
6 For the day will come when the watchmen in the mountains of Eʹphra·im will call out: ‘Rise up, let us go up to Zion, to Jehovah our God.’”
7 For this is what Jehovah says: “Cry out to Jacob with rejoicing. Shout for joy because you are over the nations. Proclaim it; offer praise and say, ‘O Jehovah, save your people, the remnant of Israel.’
8 I am bringing them back from the land of the north. I will gather them together from the remotest parts of the earth. Among them will be the blind and the lame, The pregnant woman and the one giving birth, all together. As a great congregation they will return here.
9 They will come weeping. I will lead them as they beg for favor. I will guide them to streams of water, On a level path that will not make them stumble. For I am a Father to Israel, and Eʹphra·im is my firstborn.”
10 Hear the word of Jehovah, you nations, And proclaim it among the islands far away: “The One who scattered Israel will gather him together. He will watch over him as a shepherd does his flock.
11 For Jehovah will redeem Jacob And rescue him out of the hand of the one stronger than he is.
12 They will come and shout joyfully on the height of Zion And become radiant over the goodness of Jehovah, Over the grain and the new wine and the oil, And over the young of the flock and the herd. They will become like a well-watered garden, And they will never languish again.”
13 “At that time the virgin will dance joyfully, Also the young men and the old men together. I will change their mourning into exultation. I will comfort them and give them joy instead of their grief.
14 I will satisfy the priests with plenty, And my people will be satisfied with my goodness,” declares Jehovah.
15 “This is what Jehovah says: ‘A voice is heard in Raʹmah, lamentation and bitter weeping: Rachel is weeping over her sons. She has refused to be comforted over her sons, Because they are no more.’”
16 This is what Jehovah says: “‘Hold back your voice from weeping and your eyes from tears, For there is a reward for your activity,’ declares Jehovah. ‘They will return from the land of the enemy.’
17 ‘And there is a hope for your future,’ declares Jehovah. ‘Your sons will return to their own territory.’”
18 “I have surely heard Eʹphra·im’s moaning, ‘You have corrected me, and I have been corrected, Like a calf that has not been trained. Bring me back, and I will readily turn back, For you are Jehovah my God.
19 For after my turning back I felt remorse; After I was made to understand I struck my thigh in grief. I was ashamed and humiliated, For I bore the reproach of my youth.’”
20 “Is Eʹphra·im not a precious son to me, a beloved child? For as often as I speak against him, I do remember him still. That is why my emotions are stirred for him. And I will surely have pity on him,” declares Jehovah.
21 “Set up road markers for yourself, And put up signposts. Pay attention to the highway, the way that you have to go. Return, O virgin of Israel, return to these cities of yours.
22 How long will you waver, O unfaithful daughter? For Jehovah has created something new in the earth: A woman will eagerly pursue a man.”
23 This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “They will again say these words in the land of Judah and in its cities when I gather back their captives: ‘May Jehovah bless you, O righteous dwelling place, O holy mountain.’
24 And in it Judah and all its cities will dwell all together, farmers and those who lead the flocks.
25 For I will satisfy the weary one and fill each one who is languishing.”
26 At this I awoke and opened my eyes, and my sleep had been pleasurable to me.
27 “Look! The days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when I will sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah with the seed of man and with the seed of livestock.”
28 “And just as I watched over them to uproot, to pull down, to tear down, to destroy, and to do harm, so I will watch over them to build up and to plant,” declares Jehovah.
29 “In those days they will no longer say, ‘The fathers ate sour grapes, but the teeth of the sons were set on edge.’
30 But then each one will die for his own error. Any man eating sour grapes will have his own teeth set on edge.”
31 “Look! The days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when I will make with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah a new covenant.
32 It will not be like the covenant that I made with their forefathers on the day I took hold of their hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt, ‘my covenant that they broke, although I was their true master,’ declares Jehovah.”
33 “For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days,” declares Jehovah. “I will put my law within them, and in their heart I will write it. And I will become their God, and they will become my people.”
34 “And they will no longer teach each one his neighbor and each one his brother, saying, ‘Know Jehovah!’ for they will all know me, from the least to the greatest of them,” declares Jehovah. “For I will forgive their error, and I will no longer remember their sin.”
35 This is what Jehovah says, Who gives the sun for light by day, The laws of the moon and the stars for light by night, Who stirs up the sea and makes its waves boisterous, Whose name is Jehovah of armies:
36 “‘If these regulations should ever fail,’ declares Jehovah, ‘Only then would the offspring of Israel cease as a nation before me always.’”
37 This is what Jehovah says: “‘If the heavens above could be measured and the foundations of the earth below could be explored, only then could I reject all the offspring of Israel for all they have done,’ declares Jehovah.”
38 “Look! The days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when the city will be built to Jehovah from the Tower of Ha·nanʹel to the Corner Gate.
39 And the measuring line will go out straight ahead to the hill of Gaʹreb, and it will turn toward Goʹah.
40 And all the valley of the carcasses and of ashes and all the terraces as far as the Kidʹron Valley, clear to the corner of the Horse Gate toward the east, will be something holy to Jehovah. It will never again be uprooted or torn down.”
32 The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah in the 10th year of King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah, that is, the 18th year of Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar.
2 At that time the armies of the king of Babylon were besieging Jerusalem, and Jeremiah the prophet was confined in the Courtyard of the Guard in the house of the king of Judah.
3 For King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah had confined him, saying, “Why do you prophesy like this? You say, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will capture it,
4 and King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah will not escape from the Chal·deʹans, for he will surely be given into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will speak to him face-to-face and see him eye to eye.”’
5 ‘He will take Zed·e·kiʹah to Babylon, and there he will remain until I turn my attention to him,’ declares Jehovah. ‘Although you keep fighting against the Chal·deʹans, you will not succeed.’”
6 Jeremiah said: “The word of Jehovah has come to me, saying,
7 ‘Here Hanʹa·mel the son of Shalʹlum your uncle will come to you and say: “Buy for yourself my field in Anʹa·thoth, because you have the first right to repurchase it.”’”
8 Hanʹa·mel the son of my uncle came to me, just as Jehovah had said, into the Courtyard of the Guard, and he said to me: “Please buy my field in Anʹa·thoth, in the land of Benjamin, for you have the right to take possession of it and to repurchase it. Buy it for yourself.” At that I knew that this was by the word of Jehovah.
9 So I bought the field in Anʹa·thoth from Hanʹa·mel the son of my uncle. I weighed out the money to him, seven shekels and ten silver pieces.
10 Then I recorded it in a deed, affixed the seal, called in witnesses, and weighed the money in the scales.
11 I took the deed of purchase, the one that was sealed according to the commandment and legal requirements, as well as the one that was left unsealed,
12 and I gave the deed of purchase to Barʹuch son of Ne·riʹah son of Mah·seiʹah in the presence of Hanʹa·mel the son of my uncle, the witnesses who wrote in the deed of purchase, and all the Jews who were sitting in the Courtyard of the Guard.
13 I now commanded Barʹuch in their presence, saying:
14 “This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Take these deeds, this deed of purchase, the sealed one and the other deed left unsealed, and put them into an earthenware vessel, so that they may be kept for a long time.’
15 For this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Houses and fields and vineyards will again be bought in this land.’”
16 Then I prayed to Jehovah after giving the deed of purchase to Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah, saying:
17 “Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah! Look! You made the heavens and the earth by your great power and by your outstretched arm. Nothing is too wonderful for you,
18 the One showing loyal love to thousands, but repaying the error of the fathers to their sons after them, the true God, the great and mighty One, whose name is Jehovah of armies.
19 You are great in counsel and mighty in deed, you whose eyes observe all the ways of men, to give to each one according to his ways and according to what he does.
20 You have performed signs and miracles in the land of Egypt, which are known down to this day, and thus you have made a name for yourself in Israel and among mankind, as it is today.
21 And you brought your people Israel out of the land of Egypt, with signs, with miracles, with a mighty hand, with an outstretched arm, and with terrifying deeds.
22 “In time you gave them this land that you swore to give to their forefathers, a land flowing with milk and honey.
23 And they came in and took possession of it, but they did not obey your voice or walk in your law. They did not do anything you commanded them to do, so that you caused all this calamity to befall them.
24 Look! Men have come with siege ramparts to capture the city, and because of the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, the city will certainly fall into the hands of the Chal·deʹans who are fighting against it; what you said has all happened, as you now see.
25 But you have told me, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘Buy for yourself the field with money and call in witnesses,’ although the city will certainly be given into the hand of the Chal·deʹans.”
26 At that the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah, saying:
27 “Here I am, Jehovah, the God of all mankind. Is there anything too wonderful for me?
28 So this is what Jehovah says, ‘Here I am handing this city over to the Chal·deʹans and into the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, and he will capture it.
29 And the Chal·deʹans fighting against this city will come in and set this city on fire and burn it down along with the houses on whose roofs the people offered sacrifices to Baʹal and poured out drink offerings to other gods to offend me.’
30 “‘For the people of Israel and of Judah have done only what was bad in my eyes, from their youth on; the people of Israel keep offending me by the work of their hands,’ declares Jehovah.
31 ‘For this city, from the day that they built it down to this day, has been nothing but a cause of anger and wrath to me, so that it must be removed from before my face,
32 because of all the evil that the people of Israel and of Judah have done to offend me—they, their kings, their princes, their priests, their prophets, and the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
33 They kept turning their backs to me, not their faces; although I tried to teach them again and again, none of them would listen to receive discipline.
34 And they put their disgusting idols in the house that bears my name, in order to defile it.
35 Furthermore, they built the high places of Baʹal in the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom, in order to make their sons and their daughters pass through the fire to Moʹlech, something that I had not commanded them and that had never come into my heart to do such a detestable thing, causing Judah to sin.’
36 “Therefore this is what Jehovah the God of Israel says concerning this city that you are saying will be given into the hand of the king of Babylon by the sword, the famine, and the pestilence,
37 ‘Here I will gather them together from all the lands where I dispersed them in my anger and in my wrath and in great indignation, and I will bring them back to this place and let them dwell in security.
38 And they will be my people, and I will be their God.
39 And I will give them one heart and one way so that they may always fear me, for their own good and the good of their children after them.
40 And I will make with them an everlasting covenant, that I will not turn away from doing good to them; and I will put the fear of me in their hearts, so that they will not turn away from me.
41 I will exult over them to do good to them, and I will firmly plant them in this land, with all my heart and with all my soul.’”
42 “For this is what Jehovah says, ‘Just as I have brought on this people all this great calamity, so I will bring on them all the goodness that I am promising them.
43 And fields will again be bought in this land, though you are saying: “It is a wasteland without man and beast, and it has been handed over to the Chal·deʹans.”’
44 “‘Fields will be bought with money, deeds of purchase will be recorded and sealed, and witnesses will be called in the land of Benjamin, in the areas around Jerusalem, in the cities of Judah, in the cities of the mountainous region, in the cities of the lowland, and in the cities of the south, because I will bring back their captives,’ declares Jehovah.”
33 The word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah the second time, while he was still confined in the Courtyard of the Guard, saying:
2 “This is what Jehovah the Maker of earth says, Jehovah who formed it and firmly established it; Jehovah is his name,
3 ‘Call to me, and I will answer you and readily tell you great and incomprehensible things that you have not known.’”
4 “For this is what Jehovah the God of Israel says concerning the houses of this city and the houses of the kings of Judah that are pulled down because of the siege ramparts and the sword,
5 and concerning those who are coming to fight the Chal·deʹans, filling these places with the carcasses of those whom I struck down in my anger and in my wrath, those whose evil has caused me to hide my face from this city:
6 ‘Here I am bringing recuperation and health to her, and I will heal them and reveal to them an abundance of peace and truth.
7 And I will bring back the captives of Judah and the captives of Israel, and I will build them up as I did at the start.
8 And I will purify them from all the guilt of their sins against me, and I will forgive all the guilt of their sins and their transgressions against me.
9 And she will become to me a name of exultation, a praise, and a beauty before all the nations of the earth who will hear of all the goodness that I bestow on them. And they will be in dread and will tremble because of all the goodness and peace that I will bestow on her.’”
10 “This is what Jehovah says: ‘In this place that you will say is a wasteland, without man or livestock, in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem that are desolate, without man or inhabitant or livestock, there will again be heard
11 the sound of exultation and the sound of rejoicing, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the voice of those saying: “Give thanks to Jehovah of armies, for Jehovah is good; his loyal love endures forever!”’ “‘They will bring thanksgiving offerings into the house of Jehovah, for I will bring back the captives of the land, as at the start,’ says Jehovah.”
12 “This is what Jehovah of armies says: ‘In this wasteland, without man or livestock, and in all its cities, there will again be pastures for the shepherds to rest their flocks.’
13 “‘In the cities of the mountainous region, in the cities of the lowland, in the cities of the south, in the land of Benjamin, in the areas around Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, flocks will again pass under the hands of the one counting them,’ says Jehovah.”
14 “‘Look! The days are coming,’ declares Jehovah, ‘when I will fulfill the good promise that I have spoken concerning the house of Israel and the house of Judah.
15 In those days and at that time I will cause to sprout for David a righteous sprout, and he will execute justice and righteousness in the land.
16 In those days Judah will be saved and Jerusalem will reside in security. And this is what she will be called: Jehovah Is Our Righteousness.’”
17 “For this is what Jehovah says: ‘There will never fail to be a man from David’s line to sit on the throne of the house of Israel,
18 nor will the Levitical priests ever fail to have a man stand before me to offer whole burnt offerings, to burn grain offerings, and to offer sacrifices.’”
19 And the word of Jehovah again came to Jeremiah, saying:
20 “This is what Jehovah says, ‘If you could break my covenant regarding the day and my covenant regarding the night, to prevent day and night from coming at their proper time,
21 only then could my covenant with my servant David be broken, so that he should not have a son ruling as king on his throne, and so also my covenant with the Levitical priests, my ministers.
22 Just as the army of the heavens cannot be counted and the sand of the sea cannot be measured, so I will multiply the offspring of my servant David and the Levites who are ministering to me.’”
23 And the word of Jehovah again came to Jeremiah, saying:
24 “Have you not taken note of what this people is saying, ‘Jehovah will reject the two families that he chose’? And they are treating my own people with disrespect, and they no longer regard them as a nation.
25 “This is what Jehovah says: ‘Just as surely as I have established my covenant regarding the day and the night, the laws of heaven and earth,
26 so I will never reject the offspring of Jacob and of my servant David, so as not to take from his offspring rulers over the descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. For I will gather back their captives and have pity on them.’”
34 The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, when King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon and all his army and all the kingdoms of the earth under his dominion and all the peoples were fighting against Jerusalem and all her cities:
2 “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘Go and speak to King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah and tell him: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘Here I am giving this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will burn it with fire.
3 And you will not escape out of his hand, for you will without fail be caught and handed over to him. And you will see the king of Babylon eye to eye, and he will speak to you face-to-face, and you will go to Babylon.’
4 However, hear the word of Jehovah, O King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah, ‘This is what Jehovah says concerning you: “You will not die by the sword.
5 In peace you will die, and they will make a burning ceremony for you as they did for your fathers, the former kings who were before you, and they will mourn you, ‘Alas, O master!’ for ‘I have spoken the word,’ declares Jehovah.”’”’”
6 Jeremiah the prophet then spoke all these words to King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah in Jerusalem,
7 when the armies of the king of Babylon were fighting against Jerusalem and against all the cities of Judah that were left, against Laʹchish and against A·zeʹkah; for they were the only fortified cities that remained of the cities of Judah.
8 The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah after King Zed·e·kiʹah had made a covenant with all the people in Jerusalem to proclaim liberty to them,
9 that everyone should free his Hebrew slaves, male and female, so that no one would keep a fellow Jew as his slave.
10 So all the princes and all the people obeyed. They had entered into the covenant that everyone should free his male and female slaves and not keep them as slaves any longer. They obeyed and let them go.
11 However, they later brought back the male and female slaves whom they had freed, and they again forced them back into slavery.
12 So the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:
13 “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘I made a covenant with your forefathers in the day I brought them out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery, saying:
14 “At the end of seven years, each of you should free his Hebrew brother who was sold to you and who has served you six years; you must set him free.” But your forefathers did not listen or incline their ears to me.
15 And recently you yourselves turned around and did what was right in my eyes by proclaiming liberty to your fellow men, and you made a covenant before me in the house that bears my name.
16 But then you turned around and profaned my name by bringing back your male and female slaves whom you had freed according to their desire, and you forced them back into slavery.’
17 “Therefore this is what Jehovah says: ‘You have not obeyed me in proclaiming liberty, each one to his brother and to his fellow man. So I will now proclaim liberty to you,’ declares Jehovah, ‘to the sword, to pestilence, and to famine, and I will make you an object of horror to all the kingdoms of the earth.
18 And this is what will happen to the men who violated my covenant by not carrying out the words of the covenant that they made before me when they cut the calf in two and passed between the halves,
19 namely, the princes of Judah, the princes of Jerusalem, the court officials, the priests, and all the people of the land who passed between the halves of the calf:
20 I will hand them over to their enemies and to those seeking to take their lives, and their dead bodies will become food for the birds of the heavens and for the beasts of the earth.
21 And I will give King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah and his princes into the hand of their enemies and into the hand of those seeking to take their lives and into the hand of the armies of the king of Babylon, who are withdrawing from against you.’
22 “‘Here I will give the order,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and I will bring them back to this city, and they will fight against it and capture it and burn it with fire; and the cities of Judah I will make a wasteland, without an inhabitant.’”
35 The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah in the days of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, saying:
2 “Go to the house of the Reʹcha·bites and speak with them and bring them into the house of Jehovah, into one of the dining rooms; then offer them wine to drink.”
3 So I took Ja·az·a·niʹah the son of Jeremiah the son of Hab·az·zi·niʹah, his brothers, all his sons, and the entire house of the Reʹcha·bites
4 into the house of Jehovah. I brought them to the dining room of the sons of Haʹnan the son of Ig·da·liʹah, a man of the true God, which was next to the dining room of the princes that was above the dining room of Ma·a·seiʹah the son of Shalʹlum the doorkeeper.
5 Then I put cups and goblets full of wine before the men of the house of the Reʹcha·bites and said to them: “Drink wine.”
6 But they said: “We will not drink wine, because Je·honʹa·dab the son of Reʹchab, our forefather, gave us this command, ‘Neither you nor your sons must ever drink wine.
7 And you must not build a house, sow seed, or plant or obtain a vineyard. Instead, you must always dwell in tents, so that you may live for a long time in the land where you are residing as foreigners.’
8 So we continue to obey the voice of Je·honʹa·dab the son of our forefather Reʹchab in all that he commanded us, by never drinking any wine—we, our wives, our sons, and our daughters.
9 And we do not build houses to dwell in, nor do we have vineyards or fields or seed.
10 We keep living in tents and obeying all that Je·honʹa·dab our forefather commanded us.
11 But when King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon came up against the land, we said, ‘Come, let us go into Jerusalem to escape the army of the Chal·deʹans and of the Syrians,’ and now we are living in Jerusalem.”
12 And the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah, saying:
13 “This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Go and say to the men of Judah and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem: “Were you not continually urged to obey my words?” declares Jehovah.
14 “Je·honʹa·dab the son of Reʹchab commanded his descendants not to drink wine, and they have carried out his words by not drinking it to this day, thus obeying the order of their forefather. However, I have spoken to you again and again, but you have not obeyed me.
15 And I kept sending all my servants the prophets to you, sending them again and again, saying, ‘Turn back, please, each of you from your evil ways, and do what is right! Do not walk after other gods and serve them. Then you will keep dwelling in the land that I gave to you and your forefathers.’ But you did not incline your ear or listen to me.
16 The descendants of Je·honʹa·dab the son of Reʹchab have carried out the order that their forefather gave them, but these people have not listened to me.”’”
17 “Therefore this is what Jehovah, the God of armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Here I am bringing on Judah and on all the inhabitants of Jerusalem all the calamity that I have warned them about, for I have spoken to them, but they would not listen, and I kept calling to them, but they would not answer.’”
18 And Jeremiah said to the household of the Reʹcha·bites: “This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Because you have obeyed the order of your forefather Je·honʹa·dab and you continue to observe all his orders, doing exactly what he ordered you,
19 this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “There will never fail to be a descendant of Je·honʹa·dab the son of Reʹchab to serve in my presence.”’”
36 Now in the fourth year of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:
2 “Take a scroll and write in it all the words that I have spoken to you against Israel and Judah and all the nations, from the first day I spoke to you in the days of Jo·siʹah to this day.
3 Perhaps when those of the house of Judah hear of all the calamity that I intend to bring on them, they may turn back from their evil ways, so that I may forgive their error and their sin.”
4 Jeremiah then called Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah, and Jeremiah dictated all the words that Jehovah had spoken to him, and Barʹuch wrote them in the scroll.
5 Then Jeremiah commanded Barʹuch: “I am confined and unable to enter the house of Jehovah.
6 So you are the one who must go in and read aloud the words of Jehovah from the scroll that you wrote at my dictation. Read them in the hearing of the people at the house of Jehovah on the day of a fast; thus you will read them to all the people of Judah who come in from their cities.
7 Perhaps their request for favor will reach Jehovah, and they will turn back, each one from his evil ways, for great is the anger and the wrath that Jehovah has declared against this people.”
8 So Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah did all that Jeremiah the prophet had commanded him; he read aloud from the scroll the words of Jehovah at the house of Jehovah.
9 Now in the fifth year of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, in the ninth month, all the people in Jerusalem and all the people who came into Jerusalem from the cities of Judah proclaimed a fast before Jehovah.
10 Barʹuch then read aloud from the scroll the words of Jeremiah at the house of Jehovah, in the chamber of Gem·a·riʹah the son of Shaʹphan the copyist, in the upper courtyard, at the entrance of the new gate of the house of Jehovah, in the hearing of all the people.
11 When Mi·caiʹah the son of Gem·a·riʹah the son of Shaʹphan heard all the words of Jehovah from the scroll,
12 he went down to the house of the king, to the secretary’s chamber. All the princes were sitting there: E·lishʹa·ma the secretary, De·laʹiah the son of She·maiʹah, El·naʹthan the son of Achʹbor, Gem·a·riʹah the son of Shaʹphan, Zed·e·kiʹah the son of Han·a·niʹah, and all the other princes.
13 Mi·caiʹah told them all the words that he had heard when Barʹuch read from the scroll in the hearing of the people.
14 Then all the princes sent Je·huʹdi the son of Neth·a·niʹah the son of Shel·e·miʹah the son of Cushʹi to Barʹuch, saying: “Come and bring with you the scroll from which you read in the hearing of the people.” Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah took the scroll in his hand and went in to them.
15 They said to him: “Sit down, please, and read it aloud to us.” So Barʹuch read it to them.
16 Now as soon as they heard all the words, they looked at one another in dread, and they said to Barʹuch: “We must certainly tell the king all these words.”
17 And they asked Barʹuch: “Tell us, please, how you wrote all these words. Was it at his dictation?”
18 Barʹuch replied to them: “He dictated all these words to me, and I wrote them down with ink in this scroll.”
19 The princes said to Barʹuch: “Go and hide yourselves, you and Jeremiah, and do not let anyone know where you are.”
20 Then they went in to the king, to the courtyard, and deposited the scroll in the chamber of E·lishʹa·ma the secretary, and they told the king everything they had heard.
21 So the king sent Je·huʹdi out to get the scroll, and he brought it from the chamber of E·lishʹa·ma the secretary. Je·huʹdi began to read it in the hearing of the king and of all the princes standing by the king.
22 The king was sitting in the winter house, in the ninth month, with a fire burning in the brazier before him.
23 After Je·huʹdi had read three or four columns, the king would cut off that portion with the secretary’s knife and pitch it into the fire that was burning in the brazier, until the entire scroll ended up in the fire that was in the brazier.
24 And they felt no dread; neither the king nor all his servants who heard all these words ripped their garments apart.
25 Although El·naʹthan, De·laʹiah, and Gem·a·riʹah pleaded with the king not to burn the scroll, he did not listen to them.
26 Further, the king commanded Je·rahʹme·el the son of the king, Se·raiʹah the son of Azʹri·el, and Shel·e·miʹah the son of Abʹde·el to seize Barʹuch the secretary and Jeremiah the prophet, but Jehovah kept them concealed.
27 And the word of Jehovah again came to Jeremiah after the king had burned up the scroll containing the words that Barʹuch had written at Jeremiah’s dictation, saying:
28 “Take another scroll and write on it all the same words that were on the first scroll, which King Je·hoiʹa·kim of Judah burned up.
29 And you should say against King Je·hoiʹa·kim of Judah, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “You have burned up this scroll and said, ‘Why have you written on it: “The king of Babylon will certainly come and destroy this land and empty it of man and beast”?’
30 Therefore this is what Jehovah says against King Je·hoiʹa·kim of Judah, ‘He will have no one to sit on the throne of David, and his dead body will be left exposed to the heat by day and the frost by night.
31 I will call him and his descendants and his servants to account for their error, and I will bring on them and on the inhabitants of Jerusalem and on the men of Judah all the calamity that I have spoken against them, but they did not listen.’”’”
32 Jeremiah then took another scroll and gave it to Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah, the secretary, and at Jeremiah’s dictation he wrote on it all the words of the scroll that King Je·hoiʹa·kim of Judah had burned in the fire. And many more words like those were added.
37 And King Zed·e·kiʹah the son of Jo·siʹah began to reign in place of Co·niʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·kim, for King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon made him king in the land of Judah.
2 But he and his servants and the people of the land did not listen to the words of Jehovah spoken through Jeremiah the prophet.
3 And King Zed·e·kiʹah sent Je·huʹcal the son of Shel·e·miʹah and Zeph·a·niʹah the son of Ma·a·seiʹah the priest to Jeremiah the prophet, saying: “Please pray in our behalf to Jehovah our God.”
4 Jeremiah was moving about freely among the people, for they had not yet put him in prison.
5 Now Pharʹaoh’s army had set out from Egypt, and the Chal·deʹans who were besieging Jerusalem heard the report about them. So they withdrew from against Jerusalem.
6 Then the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah the prophet, saying:
7 “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘This is what you should say to the king of Judah, who sent you to me to inquire of me: “Look! The army of Pharʹaoh that is coming to assist you will have to go back to their land, Egypt.
8 And the Chal·deʹans will come back and fight against this city and capture it and burn it with fire.”
9 This is what Jehovah says, “Do not deceive yourselves by saying, ‘The Chal·deʹans will surely go away from against us,’ because they will not go away.
10 Even if you were to strike down the entire army of the Chal·deʹans who are fighting against you and only their wounded men were left, they would still rise up from their tents and burn this city with fire.”’”
11 When the Chal·deʹan army had withdrawn from against Jerusalem because of Pharʹaoh’s army,
12 Jeremiah set out from Jerusalem to the land of Benjamin to receive his portion there among his people.
13 But when he reached the Gate of Benjamin, the officer in charge of the guard, whose name was I·riʹjah the son of Shel·e·miʹah the son of Han·a·niʹah, seized Jeremiah the prophet and said: “You are deserting to the Chal·deʹans!”
14 But Jeremiah said: “It is not true! I am not deserting to the Chal·deʹans.” But he did not listen to him. So I·riʹjah arrested Jeremiah and brought him in to the princes.
15 The princes were furious with Jeremiah, and they beat him and imprisoned him in the house of Je·honʹa·than the secretary, which had been made into a prison.
16 Jeremiah was put into the dungeon, into the vaulted rooms, and he remained there many days.
17 Then King Zed·e·kiʹah sent for him, and the king secretly questioned him in his house. He asked, “Is there any word from Jehovah?” Jeremiah said, “There is!” and he continued, “You will be given into the hand of the king of Babylon!”
18 Jeremiah also said to King Zed·e·kiʹah: “How have I sinned against you and against your servants and against this people, so that you have put me into the prison?
19 Where, now, are your prophets who prophesied to you, ‘The king of Babylon will not come against you and against this land’?
20 Now listen, please, O my lord the king. May you grant, please, my request for favor. Do not send me back to the house of Je·honʹa·than the secretary, or I will die there.”
21 So King Zed·e·kiʹah ordered that Jeremiah be put in custody in the Courtyard of the Guard, and he was given a round loaf of bread daily from the street of the bakers until all the bread in the city was gone. And Jeremiah remained in the Courtyard of the Guard.
39 In the ninth year of King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah, in the tenth month, King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon and all his army came to Jerusalem, and they besieged it.
2 In the 11th year of Zed·e·kiʹah, in the fourth month, on the ninth day of the month, they broke through the city wall.
3 And all the princes of the king of Babylon went in and sat down in the Middle Gate, namely, Nerʹgal-shar·eʹzer the Samʹgar, Neʹbo-Sarʹse·chim the Rabʹsa·ris, Nerʹgal-shar·eʹzer the Rabʹmag, and all the rest of the princes of the king of Babylon.
4 When King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah and all the soldiers saw them, they fled, going out of the city by night by way of the king’s garden, through the gate between the double wall, and they continued by the way of the Arʹa·bah.
5 But the Chal·deʹan army chased after them, and they overtook Zed·e·kiʹah in the desert plains of Jerʹi·cho. They captured him and brought him up to King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon at Ribʹlah in the land of Haʹmath, where he passed sentence on him.
6 The king of Babylon had the sons of Zed·e·kiʹah slaughtered before his eyes there at Ribʹlah, and the king of Babylon had all the nobles of Judah slaughtered.
7 Then he blinded the eyes of Zed·e·kiʹah, after which he bound him with copper fetters to bring him to Babylon.
8 The Chal·deʹans then burned down the king’s house and the houses of the people, and they tore down the walls of Jerusalem.
9 Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard took into exile to Babylon the rest of the people who were left in the city, the deserters who had defected to him, and anyone who remained.
10 But Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard left in the land of Judah some of the poorest people, those who had nothing at all. On that day he also gave them vineyards and fields to work.
11 Now King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon gave Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard these orders concerning Jeremiah:
12 “Take him and look after him; do him no harm, and grant whatever he asks of you.”
13 So Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard, Neb·u·shazʹban the Rabʹsa·ris, Nerʹgal-shar·eʹzer the Rabʹmag, and all the principal men of the king of Babylon sent
14 and had Jeremiah taken out of the Courtyard of the Guard and handed him over to Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan to be brought to his house. So he lived among the people.
15 While Jeremiah was confined in the Courtyard of the Guard, the word of Jehovah came to him, saying:
16 “Go and tell Eʹbed-melʹech the E·thi·oʹpi·an, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “Here I am fulfilling my words on this city for calamity and not for good, and in that day you will see it happen.”’
17 “‘But I will rescue you in that day,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and you will not be handed over to the men you fear.’
18 “‘For I will surely provide you with escape, and you will not fall by the sword. You will have your life as a spoil, because you trusted in me,’ declares Jehovah.”
40 The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah after Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard let him go free from Raʹmah. He had taken him there bound with handcuffs, and he was among all the exiles of Jerusalem and of Judah who were being deported to Babylon.
2 Then the chief of the guard took Jeremiah and said to him: “Jehovah your God foretold this calamity against this place,
3 and Jehovah has brought it about just as he said, because you people sinned against Jehovah and did not obey his voice. That is why this has happened to you.
4 Now I am releasing you today from the handcuffs that were on your hands. If it seems good to you to come with me to Babylon, come, and I will look after you. But if you do not want to come with me to Babylon, do not come. See! The entire land is before you. Go wherever you choose.”
5 While Jeremiah still had not turned back, Neb·uʹzar·adʹan said: “Return to Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan, whom the king of Babylon has appointed over the cities of Judah, and stay with him among the people; or go wherever you choose.” The chief of the guard then gave him a food allowance and a gift and let him go.
6 So Jeremiah went to Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam at Mizʹpah and stayed with him among the people who were left in the land.
7 In time all the army chiefs who were in the field with their men heard that the king of Babylon had appointed Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam over the land and that he had appointed him over the men, women, and children from the poor people of the land who had not been deported to Babylon.
8 So they came to Ged·a·liʹah at Mizʹpah. They were Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah, Jo·haʹnan and Jonʹa·than the sons of Ka·reʹah, Se·raiʹah the son of Tan·huʹmeth, the sons of Eʹphai the Ne·tophʹa·thite, and Jez·a·niʹah the son of the Ma·acʹa·thite, together with their men.
9 Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan swore an oath to them and to their men, saying: “Do not be afraid of serving the Chal·deʹans. Live in the land and serve the king of Babylon, and it will go well with you.
10 As for me, I will stay in Mizʹpah to represent you to the Chal·deʹans who come to us. But you should gather wine, summer fruits, and oil and put them in your storage containers and settle in the cities that you have taken over.”
11 And all the Jews who were in Moʹab, Amʹmon, and Eʹdom, as well as those who were in all the other lands, also heard that the king of Babylon had let a remnant stay in Judah and that he had appointed over them Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan.
12 So all the Jews began returning from all the places to which they had been dispersed, and they came into the land of Judah, to Ged·a·liʹah at Mizʹpah. And they gathered wine and summer fruits in very great quantity.
13 Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and all the army chiefs who were in the field came to Ged·a·liʹah at Mizʹpah.
14 They said to him: “Do you not know that Baʹa·lis, the king of the Amʹmon·ites, has sent Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah to kill you?” But Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam did not believe them.
15 Then Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah secretly told Ged·a·liʹah in Mizʹpah: “I want to go and strike down Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah, and no one will know. Why should he kill you, and why should all the people of Judah who have gathered to you be scattered and the remnant of Judah perish?”
16 But Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam said to Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah: “Do not do this, for what you are saying concerning Ishʹma·el is a lie.”
42 Then all the army chiefs, and Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah, Jez·a·niʹah the son of Ho·shaiʹah, and all the people, from the least to the greatest, approached
2 and said to Jeremiah the prophet: “Hear, please, our request for favor, and pray in our behalf to Jehovah your God, in behalf of all this remnant, for just a few of many are left, as you can see.
3 May Jehovah your God tell us the way we should walk and what we should do.”
4 Jeremiah the prophet replied to them: “I have heard you, and I am praying to Jehovah your God according to your request; and every word that Jehovah answers you, I will tell you. I will not hold back a word from you.”
5 They replied to Jeremiah: “May Jehovah be a true and faithful witness against us if we do not do exactly as Jehovah your God instructs us through you.
6 Whether good or bad, we will obey the voice of Jehovah our God, to whom we are sending you, so that it may go well with us because we obey the voice of Jehovah our God.”
7 Now ten days later the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah.
8 So he called for Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and for all the army chiefs who were with him and for all the people, from the least to the greatest.
9 He said to them: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, to whom you sent me to present your request for favor before him:
10 ‘If you will indeed remain in this land, then I will build you up and not tear you down, and I will plant you and not uproot you, for I will feel regret over the calamity I have caused you.
11 Do not be afraid because of the king of Babylon, whom you fear.’ “‘Do not be afraid because of him,’ declares Jehovah, ‘for I am with you, to save you and to rescue you out of his hand.
12 And I will show you mercy, and he will have mercy on you and return you to your own land.
13 “‘But if you say, “No, we will not remain in this land!” and you disobey the voice of Jehovah your God
14 by saying, “No, we will go instead to the land of Egypt, where we will not see war or hear the sound of the horn or hunger for bread; there is where we will live,”
15 then hear the word of Jehovah, O remnant of Judah. This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “If you are absolutely determined to go to Egypt and you go there to reside,
16 then the very sword you are afraid of will catch up with you there in the land of Egypt, and the very famine you fear will follow after you to Egypt, and there you will die.
17 And all the men who are determined to go to Egypt to reside there will die by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence. None of them will survive or escape the calamity that I will bring on them.”’
18 “For this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Just as my anger and my wrath were poured out on the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so my wrath will be poured out on you if you go to Egypt, and you will become a curse, an object of horror, a malediction, and a reproach, and you will never again see this place.’
19 “Jehovah has spoken against you, O remnant of Judah. Do not go to Egypt. You should know for a certainty that I have warned you today
20 that your error will cost you your lives. For you sent me to Jehovah your God, saying, ‘Pray in our behalf to Jehovah our God, and tell us everything that Jehovah our God says, and we will do it.’
21 And I told you today, but you will not obey the voice of Jehovah your God or do anything he sent me to tell you.
22 Therefore, know for a certainty that by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence you will die in the place where you desire to go and reside.”
43 When Jeremiah had finished speaking to all the people all these words from Jehovah their God, every single word that Jehovah their God had sent him to tell them,
2 Az·a·riʹah the son of Ho·shaiʹah, Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah, and all the presumptuous men said to Jeremiah: “What you are saying is a lie! Jehovah our God has not sent you to say, ‘Do not go to Egypt to reside there.’
3 But Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah is inciting you against us to hand us over to the Chal·deʹans, to put us to death or to take us into exile in Babylon.”
4 So Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and all the army chiefs and all the people disobeyed the voice of Jehovah to remain in the land of Judah.
5 Instead, Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and all the army chiefs took with them all the remnant of Judah who had returned to reside in the land of Judah from all the nations where they had been dispersed.
6 They took the men, the women, the children, the daughters of the king, and everyone whom Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard had left with Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan, as well as Jeremiah the prophet and Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah.
7 And they went into the land of Egypt, for they did not obey the voice of Jehovah, and they went as far as Tahʹpan·hes.
8 Then the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah in Tahʹpan·hes, saying:
9 “Take in your hand large stones, and hide them in the mortar in the brick terrace at the entrance of the house of Pharʹaoh in Tahʹpan·hes, with the Jewish men looking on.
10 Then say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “Here I am sending for Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and I will place his throne right above these stones that I have hidden, and he will extend his royal tent over them.
11 And he will come in and strike the land of Egypt. Whoever is meant for deadly plague will be for deadly plague, and whoever is meant for captivity will be for captivity, and whoever is meant for the sword will be for the sword.
12 And I will set the houses of the gods of Egypt on fire, and he will burn them and lead them captive. He will wrap the land of Egypt around himself just as a shepherd wraps himself in his garment, and he will depart from there in peace.
13 And he will break to pieces the pillars of Beth-sheʹmesh in the land of Egypt, and he will burn the houses of the gods of Egypt with fire.”’”
44 The word that came to Jeremiah for all the Jews living in the land of Egypt, those living in Migʹdol, Tahʹpan·hes, Noph, and the land of Pathʹros, saying:
2 “This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘You have seen all the calamity that I brought on Jerusalem and on all the cities of Judah, and today they are in ruins, without an inhabitant.
3 It is because of the evil things that they did to offend me by going and making sacrifices and serving other gods whom they had not known, neither you nor your forefathers.
4 I kept sending all my servants the prophets to you, sending them again and again, saying: “Please do not do this detestable thing that I hate.”
5 But they did not listen or incline their ear to turn back from their evil by not making sacrifices to other gods.
6 So my wrath and my anger were poured out and burned in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem, and they became a ruin and a wasteland, as they are today.’
7 “And now this is what Jehovah, the God of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Why are you causing a great calamity to yourselves, so that every man and woman, child and infant, will perish from Judah, leaving you without a remnant?
8 Why should you offend me with the works of your hands by sacrificing to other gods in the land of Egypt where you have gone to reside? You will perish and become an object of cursing and a reproach among all the nations of the earth.
9 Have you forgotten the wicked deeds of your forefathers and the wicked deeds of the kings of Judah and the wicked deeds of their wives, as well as your own wicked deeds and the wicked deeds of your wives, that were done in the land of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem?
10 Down to this day they have not humbled themselves, they have shown no fear, nor have they walked in my law and my statutes that I set before you and your forefathers.’
11 “Therefore this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Here I am determined to bring calamity on you, to destroy all Judah.
12 And I will take the remnant of Judah who were determined to go to the land of Egypt to reside there, and they will all perish in the land of Egypt. They will fall by the sword and perish by the famine; from the least to the greatest, they will die by the sword and by famine. And they will become a curse, an object of horror, a malediction, and a reproach.
13 I will punish those dwelling in the land of Egypt just as I punished Jerusalem, with the sword, with famine, and with pestilence.
14 And the remnant of Judah who have gone to reside in the land of Egypt will not escape or survive to return to the land of Judah. They will long to return and dwell there, but they will not return, except for a few escapees.’”
15 All the men who knew that their wives had been making sacrifices to other gods and all the wives who were standing there, who formed a large group, and all the people who were living in the land of Egypt, in Pathʹros, answered Jeremiah:
16 “We will not listen to the word that you have spoken to us in the name of Jehovah.
17 Instead, we will surely carry out every word that our mouths have spoken, to make sacrifices to the Queen of Heaven and to pour out drink offerings to her, just as we, our forefathers, our kings, and our princes did in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem when we were satisfied with bread and were well-off, when we saw no calamity at all.
18 From the time we quit making sacrifices to the Queen of Heaven and pouring out drink offerings to her, we have lacked everything and have perished by the sword and by the famine.”
19 The women added: “And when we were making sacrifices to the Queen of Heaven and pouring out drink offerings to her, was it without the consent of our husbands that we made sacrificial cakes shaped in her image and we poured out drink offerings to her?”
20 Then Jeremiah said to all the people, to the men and their wives and to all the people who were speaking to him:
21 “The sacrifices that you, your forefathers, your kings, your princes, and the people of the land made in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem—Jehovah remembered them and they came up into his heart!
22 Finally Jehovah could no longer put up with your evil practices and the detestable things you had done, and your land became a devastated place, an object of horror and cursing, without an inhabitant, as it is today.
23 It is because you have made these sacrifices and because you have sinned against Jehovah by not obeying the voice of Jehovah and following his law, his statutes, and his reminders that this calamity has come upon you, as is the case today.”
24 Jeremiah continued to say to all the people and to all the women: “Hear the word of Jehovah, all you of Judah who are in the land of Egypt.
25 This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘What you and your wives have spoken with your mouths, you have fulfilled with your hands, for you said: “We will surely carry out our vows to make sacrifices to the Queen of Heaven and to pour out drink offerings to her.” You women will surely carry out your vows and perform your vows.’
26 “Therefore hear the word of Jehovah, all you of Judah who are living in the land of Egypt: ‘“Here I swear by my own great name,” says Jehovah, “that my name will no longer be called on in an oath by any man of Judah in all the land of Egypt who says, ‘As surely as the Sovereign Lord Jehovah is alive!’
27 Now I am watching over them to bring calamity and not something good; all the men of Judah in the land of Egypt will perish by the sword and by the famine, until they cease to exist.
28 Only a few will escape the sword and return from the land of Egypt to the land of Judah. Then all the remnant of Judah who came to the land of Egypt to reside there will know whose word has come true, mine or theirs!”’”
29 “‘And this is the sign for you,’ declares Jehovah, ‘that I will punish you in this place, so that you will know that my words promising calamity against you will surely come true.
30 This is what Jehovah says: “Here I am giving Pharʹaoh Hophʹra, the king of Egypt, into the hand of his enemies and of those seeking to take his life, just as I gave King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah into the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, who was his enemy and who sought to take his life.”’”
45 This is the word that Jeremiah the prophet spoke to Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah when he wrote in a book these words dictated by Jeremiah in the fourth year of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah:
2 “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says concerning you, Barʹuch,
3 ‘You have said: “Woe to me, for Jehovah has added grief to my pain! I am weary from my groaning, and I have found no resting-place.”’
4 “You should say to him, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Look! What I have built up I am tearing down, and what I have planted I am uprooting—the entire land.
5 But you are seeking great things for yourself. Stop seeking such things.”’ “‘For I am about to bring a calamity on all flesh,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and wherever you may go, I will grant you your life as a spoil.’”
46 This is the word of Jehovah to Jeremiah the prophet concerning the nations:
2 For Egypt, concerning the army of Pharʹaoh Neʹcho the king of Egypt, who was along the Eu·phraʹtes River and was defeated at Carʹche·mish by King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon in the fourth year of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah:
3 “Prepare your bucklers and large shields, And advance to the battle.
4 Harness the horses and mount, you horsemen. Take your positions and put on your helmets. Polish the lances and put on your coats of mail.
5 ‘Why do I see them terror-stricken? They are retreating, their warriors are crushed. They have fled in panic, their warriors have not turned around. There is terror all around,’ declares Jehovah.
6 ‘The swift cannot flee, and the warriors cannot escape. In the north, by the bank of the Eu·phraʹtes River, They have stumbled and fallen.’
7 Who is this coming up like the Nile River, Like the rivers of surging waters?
8 Egypt comes up just like the Nile River, Like rivers of surging waters, And it says, ‘I will go up and cover the earth. I will destroy the city and those inhabiting it.’
9 Go up, you horses! Drive madly, you chariots! Let the warriors advance, Cush and Put, who handle the shield, And the Luʹdim, who handle and bend the bow.
10 “That day belongs to the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, the day of vengeance for taking revenge on his adversaries. And the sword will devour and satisfy itself and take its fill of their blood, for the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, has a sacrifice in the land of the north by the Eu·phraʹtes River.
11 Go up to Gilʹe·ad to get balsam, O virgin daughter of Egypt. In vain you have multiplied your remedies, For there is no cure for you.
12 The nations have heard your dishonor, And your outcry has filled the land. For warrior stumbles against warrior, And they both fall down together.”
13 This is the word that Jehovah spoke to Jeremiah the prophet regarding the coming of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon to strike down the land of Egypt:
14 “Declare it in Egypt, proclaim it in Migʹdol. Proclaim it in Noph and in Tahʹpan·hes. Say, ‘Take your positions and prepare yourselves, For a sword will devour all around you.
15 Why have your powerful men been swept away? They did not stand their ground, For Jehovah has pushed them down.
16 In great numbers they are stumbling and falling. They are saying to one another: “Get up! Let us return to our people and our homeland Because of the cruel sword.”’
17 There they have proclaimed, ‘Pharʹaoh king of Egypt is just a meaningless noise Who has let the opportunity pass by.’
18 ‘As surely as I am alive,’ declares the King, whose name is Jehovah of armies, ‘He will come in like Taʹbor among the mountains And like Carʹmel by the sea.
19 Prepare your baggage for exile, O daughter inhabiting Egypt. For Noph will become an object of horror; It will be set afire and left without an inhabitant.
20 Egypt is like a good-looking heifer, But stinging flies will come against her from the north.
21 Even her hired soldiers in her midst are like fattened calves, But they have also turned back and fled together. They could not stand their ground, For the day of their disaster has come upon them, Their time of reckoning.’
22 ‘Her sound is like that of a slithering serpent, For they come after her in force, with axes, Like men cutting down trees.
23 They will cut down her forest,’ declares Jehovah, ‘though it seemed impenetrable. For they are more numerous than locusts, without number.
24 The daughter of Egypt will be put to shame. She will be handed over to the people of the north.’
25 “Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Now I am turning my attention to Aʹmon from No, to Pharʹaoh, to Egypt, to her gods, and to her kings—yes, to Pharʹaoh and all those trusting in him.’
26 “‘And I will hand them over to those seeking to take their life, to King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon and his servants. But afterward she will be inhabited as in times past,’ declares Jehovah.
27 ‘As for you, do not be afraid, my servant Jacob, And do not be terrified, O Israel. For I will save you from far away And your offspring from the land of their captivity. Jacob will return and be calm and undisturbed, With no one to make them afraid.
28 So do not be afraid, my servant Jacob,’ declares Jehovah, ‘for I am with you. I will make an extermination among all the nations where I dispersed you, But you I will not exterminate. I will discipline you to the proper degree, But I will by no means leave you unpunished.’”
47 This is the word of Jehovah to Jeremiah the prophet concerning the Phi·lisʹtines, before Pharʹaoh struck down Gazʹa.
2 This is what Jehovah says: “Look! Waters are coming from the north. They will become a flooding torrent. And they will flood the land and everything in it, The city and those inhabiting it. The men will cry out, And everyone dwelling in the land will wail.
3 At the sound of the pounding hooves of his stallions, At the rattling of his war chariots And the rumbling of his wheels, Fathers will not even turn around for their sons, For their hands fall limp,
4 Because the day that is coming will destroy all the Phi·lisʹtines; It will cut off from Tyre and Siʹdon every remaining ally. For Jehovah will destroy the Phi·lisʹtines, Who are the remaining ones from the island of Caphʹtor.
5 Baldness will come to Gazʹa. Ashʹke·lon has been silenced. O remnant of their valley plain, How long will you keep making cuts on yourself?
6 Ah! The sword of Jehovah! How long will you not be quiet? Go back into your sheath. Take your rest and be silent.
7 How can it be quiet When Jehovah has given it a command? Against Ashʹke·lon and the seacoast, There is where he has assigned it.”
48 For Moʹab, this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “Woe to Neʹbo, for she has been destroyed! Kir·i·a·thaʹim has been put to shame and captured. The secure refuge has been put to shame and shattered.
2 They no longer praise Moʹab. In Heshʹbon they have plotted her downfall: ‘Come, let us put an end to her as a nation.’ You too, O Madʹmen, should keep silent, For the sword is following you.
3 There is the sound of an outcry from Hor·o·naʹim, Of destruction and great collapse.
4 Moʹab has been broken down. Her little ones cry out.
5 On the ascent of Luʹhith they weep continually as they climb. And on the way down from Hor·o·naʹim they hear cries of distress over the catastrophe.
6 Flee, escape for your lives! You must become like a juniper tree in the wilderness.
7 Because you trust in your works and in your treasures, You will also be captured. And Cheʹmosh will go into exile, Together with his priests and his princes.
8 The destroyer will come in on every city, And no city will escape. The valley will perish, And the level land will be annihilated, just as Jehovah has said.
9 Set up a marker for Moʹab, For as she falls into ruins she will flee, And her cities will become an object of horror, Without an inhabitant.
10 Cursed is the one who carries out the mission of Jehovah neglectfully! Cursed is the one who holds back his sword from bloodshed!
11 The Moʹab·ites have been undisturbed since their youth, Like wine that has settled on the dregs. They have not been poured from one vessel into another, And they have never gone into exile. That is why their taste has remained the same, And their aroma has not changed.
12 “‘Therefore look! the days are coming,’ declares Jehovah, ‘when I will send men to overturn them. They will turn them over and empty out their vessels, and they will smash their large jars to pieces.
13 And the Moʹab·ites will be ashamed of Cheʹmosh, just as the house of Israel is ashamed of Bethʹel, which was their confidence.
14 How dare you say: “We are mighty warriors, ready for battle”?’
15 ‘Moʹab has been destroyed, Her cities have been invaded, And their choicest young men have been slaughtered,’ Declares the King, whose name is Jehovah of armies.
16 The disaster on the Moʹab·ites is coming soon, And their downfall is approaching quickly.
17 All those around them will have to sympathize with them, All those knowing their name. Tell them: ‘O how the mighty rod has been broken, the staff of beauty!’
18 Come down from your glory, And sit down in thirst, O daughter inhabiting Diʹbon, For the destroyer of Moʹab has come against you, And he will bring your fortified places to ruin.
19 Stand by the road and watch, inhabitant of A·roʹer. Ask the man fleeing and the woman escaping, ‘What has happened?’
20 Moʹab has been put to shame and struck with terror. Wail and cry out. Proclaim in Arʹnon that Moʹab has been destroyed.
21 “Judgment has come to the level land, against Hoʹlon, Jaʹhaz, and Mephʹa·ath;
22 against Diʹbon, Neʹbo, and Beth-dib·la·thaʹim;
23 against Kir·i·a·thaʹim, Beth-gaʹmul, and Beth-meʹon;
24 against Keʹri·oth and Bozʹrah; and against all the cities of the land of Moʹab, those far and near.
25 ‘The strength of Moʹab has been cut down; His arm has been broken,’ declares Jehovah.
26 ‘Make him drunk, for he has exalted himself against Jehovah. Moʹab wallows in his vomit, And he is an object of ridicule.
27 Was Israel not an object of ridicule to you? Was he found among thieves, So that you should shake your head and speak against him?
28 Leave the cities and live on the crag, inhabitants of Moʹab, And become like a dove that nests along the sides of the gorge.’”
29 “We have heard about the pride of Moʹab—he is very haughty— About his arrogance, his pride, his haughtiness, and the loftiness of his heart.”
30 “‘I know his fury,’ declares Jehovah, ‘But his empty talk will come to nothing. They will do nothing.
31 That is why I will wail over Moʹab, For all Moʹab I will cry out And moan for the men of Kir-heʹres.
32 With more than the weeping for Jaʹzer, I will weep for you, O vine of Sibʹmah. Your flourishing shoots have crossed the sea. To the sea, to Jaʹzer, they have reached. Upon your summer fruit and your grape harvest The destroyer has descended.
33 Rejoicing and joyfulness have been removed from the orchard And from the land of Moʹab. I have caused the wine to stop flowing from the winepress. No one will be treading with shouts of joy. The shouting will be different shouting.’”
34 “‘There is an outcry from Heshʹbon clear to E·le·aʹleh. They raise their voice clear to Jaʹhaz, From Zoʹar to Hor·o·naʹim to Egʹlath-she·liʹshi·yah. Even the waters of Nimʹrim will become desolate.
35 I will cause to cease from Moʹab,’ declares Jehovah, ‘The one bringing an offering on the high place And the one making sacrifices to his god.
36 That is why my heart will moan for Moʹab like a flute, And my heart will moan for the men of Kir-heʹres like a flute. For the wealth he has produced will perish.
37 For every head is bald, And every beard is clipped. There are cuts on every hand, And there is sackcloth on their hips!’”
38 “‘On all the roofs of Moʹab And in all her public squares, There is nothing but wailing. For I have broken Moʹab Like a discarded jar,’ declares Jehovah.
39 ‘How she is terrified! Wail! How Moʹab has turned his back in shame! Moʹab has become an object of ridicule, Something terrifying to all those around him.’”
40 “For this is what Jehovah says: ‘Look! Just like an eagle that swoops down, He will spread his wings over Moʹab.
41 The towns will be captured, And her strongholds will be seized. In that day the heart of Moʹab’s warriors Will be like the heart of a woman in childbirth.’”
42 “‘And Moʹab will be annihilated from being a people, For it is against Jehovah that he has exalted himself.
43 Terror and the pit and the trap are before you, O inhabitant of Moʹab,’ declares Jehovah.
44 ‘Anyone fleeing the terror will fall into the pit, And anyone coming up from the pit will be caught in the trap.’ ‘For I will bring on Moʹab the year of their punishment,’ declares Jehovah.
45 ‘In the shadow of Heshʹbon, those fleeing stand powerless. For a fire will come out of Heshʹbon And a flame from within Siʹhon. It will consume the forehead of Moʹab And the skull of the sons of tumult.’
46 ‘Woe to you, O Moʹab! The people of Cheʹmosh have perished. For your sons have been taken captive, And your daughters have gone into exile.
47 But I will gather the captives of Moʹab in the final part of the days,’ declares Jehovah. ‘Down to this point is the judgment on Moʹab.’”
49 For the Amʹmon·ites, this is what Jehovah says: “Does Israel have no sons? Does he have no heir? Why has Malʹcam taken possession of Gad? And why are his people living in Israel’s cities?”
2 “‘Therefore look! the days are coming,’ declares Jehovah, ‘When I will cause the alarm signal of war to be heard against Rabʹbah of the Amʹmon·ites. She will become a desolate mound, And her dependent towns will be set on fire.’ ‘And Israel will take possession of those who dispossessed him,’ says Jehovah.
3 ‘Wail, O Heshʹbon, for Aʹi has been destroyed! Cry out, O dependent towns of Rabʹbah. Put on sackcloth. Wail and rove about among the stone pens, For Malʹcam will go into exile, Together with his priests and his princes.
4 Why do you brag about the valleys, About your flowing plain, O unfaithful daughter, Who trusts in her treasures And who says: “Who will come against me?”’”
5 “‘Here I am bringing something dreadful on you,’ declares the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, ‘From all those around you. You will be dispersed in every direction, And no one will gather those who flee.’”
6 “‘But afterward I will gather the captives of the Amʹmon·ites,’ declares Jehovah.”
7 For Eʹdom, this is what Jehovah of armies says: “Is there no longer any wisdom in Teʹman? Has good advice perished from those with understanding? Has their wisdom rotted?
8 Flee, turn back! Go and dwell down in the depths, O inhabitants of Deʹdan! For I will bring disaster on Eʹsau When the time comes to turn my attention to him.
9 If grape gatherers came in to you, Would they not leave some behind for gleaning? If thieves came in by night, They would cause only as much ruin as they wanted.
10 But I will strip Eʹsau bare. I will uncover his places of concealment, So that he cannot hide. His children and his brothers and his neighbors will all be destroyed, And he will be no more.
11 Leave your fatherless children, And I will preserve them alive, And your widows will trust in me.”
12 For this is what Jehovah says: “Look! If those not sentenced to drink the cup must drink it, should you be left completely unpunished? You will not be left unpunished, for you must drink it.”
13 “For by myself I have sworn,” declares Jehovah, “that Bozʹrah will become an object of horror, a reproach, a devastation, and a curse; and all her cities will become perpetual ruins.”
14 I have heard a report from Jehovah, An envoy has been sent among the nations, saying: “Gather yourselves together and come against her; Prepare for battle.”
15 “For look! I have made you insignificant among the nations, Despised among men.
16 The shuddering you caused has deceived you, The presumptuousness of your heart, O you who reside in the retreats of the crag, Occupying the highest hill. Although you build your nest high up like an eagle, I will bring you down from there,” declares Jehovah.
17 “And Eʹdom must become an object of horror. Everyone passing along by her will stare in horror and whistle on account of all her plagues.
18 Just as in the overthrow of Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah and of their neighboring towns,” Jehovah says, “no one will dwell there, and no man will settle there.
19 “Look! Someone will come up against the secure pastures like a lion from the dense thickets along the Jordan, but in a moment I will make him run away from her. And I will appoint over her the chosen one. For who is like me, and who will challenge me? What shepherd can stand before me?
20 Therefore hear, O men, the decision that Jehovah has made against Eʹdom and what he has thought out against the inhabitants of Teʹman: Surely the little ones of the flock will be dragged away. He will make their dwelling place desolate because of them.
21 At the sound of their falling, the earth has quaked. There is an outcry! The sound has been heard as far as the Red Sea.
22 Look! Just like an eagle he will ascend and swoop down, And he will spread out his wings over Bozʹrah. In that day the heart of the warriors of Eʹdom Will become like the heart of a woman in childbirth.”
23 For Damascus: “Haʹmath and Arʹpad have been put to shame, For they have heard a bad report. They melt in fear. There is anxiety in the sea that cannot be calmed.
24 Damascus has lost courage. She has turned to flee, but panic has seized her. Distress and pain have taken hold of her, Like a woman who is giving birth.
25 How is it that the city of praise has not been abandoned, The town of exultation?
26 For her young men will fall in her public squares, And all the soldiers will perish in that day,” declares Jehovah of armies.
27 “I will set the wall of Damascus on fire, And it will consume the fortified towers of Ben-haʹdad.”
28 For Keʹdar and the kingdoms of Haʹzor, which King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon struck down, this is what Jehovah says: “Rise up, go up to Keʹdar, And destroy the sons of the East.
29 Their tents and their flocks will be taken, Their tent cloths and all their goods. Their camels will be carried off, And they will cry out to them, ‘Terror is all around!’”
30 “Flee, go far away! Go and dwell down in the depths, O inhabitants of Haʹzor,” declares Jehovah. “For King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon has devised a strategy against you, And he has thought out a plan against you.”
31 “Rise up, go up against the nation that is at peace, Dwelling in security!” declares Jehovah. “It has no doors or bars; they live in isolation.
32 Their camels will become plunder, And their abundant livestock a spoil. I will scatter them to every wind, Those who clip their hair at the temples, And I will bring their disaster from every direction,” declares Jehovah.
33 “And Haʹzor will become a lair of jackals, A perpetual desolation. No one will dwell there, And no man will settle in her.”
34 This is the word of Jehovah that came to Jeremiah the prophet concerning Eʹlam in the beginning of the reign of King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah:
35 “This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Here I am breaking the bow of Eʹlam, the source of their mightiness.
36 I will bring in on Eʹlam the four winds from the four extremities of the heavens, and I will scatter them to all these winds. There will not be a nation to which the dispersed ones of Eʹlam will not go.’”
37 “I will shatter the Eʹlam·ites before their enemies and before those seeking to take their life; and I will bring calamity on them, my burning anger,” declares Jehovah. “And I will send the sword after them until I have exterminated them.”
38 “And I will set my throne in Eʹlam, and I will destroy from there the king and the princes,” declares Jehovah.
39 “But in the final part of the days, I will gather the captives of Eʹlam,” declares Jehovah.
50 The word that Jehovah spoke concerning Babylon, concerning the land of the Chal·deʹans, through Jeremiah the prophet:
2 “Declare it among the nations and proclaim it. Raise a signal and proclaim it. Do not hide anything! Say, ‘Babylon has been captured. Bel has been put to shame. Merʹo·dach has become terrified. Her images have been put to shame. Her disgusting idols have become terrified.’
3 For a nation has come against her from the north. It makes her land an object of horror; No one is dwelling in her. Both man and beast have taken flight; They have gone away.”
4 “In those days and at that time,” declares Jehovah, “the people of Israel and the people of Judah will come together. They will weep as they walk, and together they will seek Jehovah their God.
5 They will ask the way to Zion, with their faces turned in that direction, saying, ‘Come and let us join ourselves to Jehovah in an everlasting covenant that will not be forgotten.’
6 My people have become a flock of lost sheep. Their own shepherds caused them to stray. They led them away onto the mountains, roaming from mountain to hill. They have forgotten their resting-place.
7 All those finding them have devoured them, and their enemies have said, ‘We are not guilty, because they sinned against Jehovah, against the dwelling place of righteousness and the hope of their forefathers, Jehovah.’”
8 “Flee out of the midst of Babylon, Go out of the land of the Chal·deʹans, And be like the leading animals before the flock.
9 For here I am raising up and bringing against Babylon An assembly of great nations from the land of the north. They will come against her in battle formation; From there she will be captured. Their arrows are like those of a warrior Causing bereavement of children; They do not come back without results.
10 Chal·deʹa will become a spoil. All those taking spoil from her will be fully satisfied,” declares Jehovah.
11 “For you kept rejoicing, you kept exulting When pillaging my own inheritance. For you kept pawing like a heifer in the grass, And you kept neighing like stallions.
12 Your mother has been put to shame. She who gave birth to you has been disappointed. Look! She is the least of the nations, A waterless wilderness and a desert.
13 Because of the indignation of Jehovah she will not be inhabited; She will become utterly desolate. Anyone passing by Babylon will stare in horror And whistle because of all her plagues.
14 Come against Babylon in battle formation on every side, All you who are bending the bow. Shoot at her, spare no arrow, For it is against Jehovah that she has sinned.
15 Shout a war cry against her on every side. She has surrendered. Her pillars have fallen, her walls are torn down, For it is the vengeance of Jehovah. Take your vengeance on her. Do to her just as she has done.
16 Cut off the sower from Babylon And the one handling the sickle in harvesttime. Because of the cruel sword, each will return to his own people, Each one will flee to his own land.
17 “The people of Israel are scattered sheep. Lions have dispersed them. First the king of As·syrʹi·a devoured them; then King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon gnawed on their bones.
18 Therefore this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Here I will deal with the king of Babylon and with his land in the same way that I dealt with the king of As·syrʹi·a.
19 And I will bring Israel back to his pasture, and he will graze on Carʹmel and on Baʹshan, and on the mountains of Eʹphra·im and of Gilʹe·ad he will be satisfied.’”
20 “In those days and at that time,” declares Jehovah, “Israel’s guilt will be searched for, But there will be none, And the sins of Judah will not be found, For I will forgive those whom I let remain.”
21 “Go up against the land of Mer·a·thaʹim and against the inhabitants of Peʹkod. Let them be massacred and completely destroyed,” declares Jehovah. “Do all that I have commanded you.
22 There is the sound of war in the land, A great catastrophe.
23 How the forge hammer of all the earth has been cut down and broken! How Babylon has become an object of horror among the nations!
24 I have laid a snare for you, and you have been caught, O Babylon, And you did not know it. You were found and captured, For it was Jehovah whom you opposed.
25 Jehovah has opened his storehouse, And he brings out the weapons of his indignation. For the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, has a work In the land of the Chal·deʹans.
26 Come against her from distant places. Open up her granaries. Pile her up like heaps of grain. Destroy her completely. May she have no one left.
27 Massacre all her young bulls; Let them go down to the slaughter. Woe to them, for their day has come, Their time of reckoning!
28 There is the sound of those fleeing, Those escaping from the land of Babylon, To declare in Zion the vengeance of Jehovah our God, The vengeance for his temple.
29 Summon archers against Babylon, All who are bending the bow. Camp all around her; let no one escape. Repay her according to her activity. Do to her just as she has done. For she has acted arrogantly against Jehovah, Against the Holy One of Israel.
30 So her young men will fall in her public squares, And all her soldiers will perish in that day,” declares Jehovah.
31 “Look! I am against you, O defiant one,” declares the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, “For your day must come, the time that I will call you to account.
32 You, O defiant one, will stumble and fall, With no one to raise you up. And I will set your cities on fire, And it will consume everything around you.”
33 This is what Jehovah of armies says: “The people of Israel and Judah are oppressed, And all those taking them captive have held onto them. They have refused to let them go.
34 But their Repurchaser is strong. Jehovah of armies is his name. He will surely plead their legal case, In order to give rest to the land And to bring agitation to the inhabitants of Babylon.”
35 “There is a sword against the Chal·deʹans,” declares Jehovah, “Against the inhabitants of Babylon and against her princes and against her wise ones.
36 There is a sword against the empty talkers, and they will act foolishly. There is a sword against her warriors, and they will become terrified.
37 There is a sword against their horses and their war chariots, And against all the mixed populations in her midst, And they will become like women. There is a sword against her treasures, and they will be plundered.
38 There is a devastation on her waters, and they will be dried up. For it is a land of graven images, And because of their frightful visions they keep acting with madness.
39 Therefore, the desert creatures will dwell with the howling animals, And in her the ostriches will dwell. She will never again be inhabited, Nor will she be a place of residence throughout all generations.”
40 “Just as with God’s overthrow of Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah and of their neighboring towns,” declares Jehovah, “no one will dwell there, and no man will settle there.
41 Look! A people is coming in from the north; A great nation and grand kings will be raised up From the remotest parts of the earth.
42 Bow and javelin they wield. They are cruel and will show no mercy. Their sound is like the roaring sea, As they ride on their horses. Like one man, they line up in battle formation against you, O daughter of Babylon.
43 The king of Babylon has heard the report about them, And his hands drop down. Anguish seizes him, Pain like that of a woman giving birth.
44 “Look! Someone will come up against the secure pastures like a lion from the dense thickets along the Jordan, but in a moment I will make them run away from her. And I will appoint over her the chosen one. For who is like me, and who will challenge me? What shepherd can stand before me?
45 Therefore hear, O men, the decision that Jehovah has made against Babylon and what he has thought out against the land of the Chal·deʹans. Surely the little ones of the flock will be dragged away. He will make their dwelling place desolate because of them.
46 At the sound of Babylon’s capture, the earth will quake, And an outcry will be heard among the nations.”
51 This is what Jehovah says: “Here I am raising up a destructive wind Against Babylon and the inhabitants of Leb-kaʹmai.
2 I will send winnowers to Babylon, And they will winnow her and make her land empty; They will come against her on all sides in the day of calamity.
3 Let the archer not bend his bow. And let no one stand up in his coat of mail. Show no compassion for her young men. Devote all her army to destruction.
4 And they will fall slain in the land of the Chal·deʹans, Pierced through in her streets.
5 For Israel and Judah are not widowed from their God, from Jehovah of armies. But their land is full of guilt from the standpoint of the Holy One of Israel.
6 Flee out of the midst of Babylon, And escape for your life. Do not perish because of her error. For it is the time for Jehovah’s vengeance. He is paying her back for what she has done.
7 Babylon has been a golden cup in the hand of Jehovah; She made all the earth drunk. From her wine the nations have drunk; That is why the nations have gone mad.
8 Suddenly Babylon has fallen and is broken. Wail over her! Get balsam for her pain; perhaps she may be healed.”
9 “We tried to heal Babylon, but she could not be healed. Leave her and let us go, each to his own land. For her judgment has reached to the heavens; It is as high as the clouds.
10 Jehovah has brought about justice for us. Come, let us recount in Zion the work of Jehovah our God.”
11 “Polish the arrows; take up the circular shields. Jehovah has stirred up the spirit of the kings of the Medes, Because he intends to bring Babylon to ruin. For this is the vengeance of Jehovah, the vengeance for his temple.
12 Lift up a signal against the walls of Babylon. Strengthen the guard, post the watchmen. Prepare those in ambush. For Jehovah has devised the strategy, And he will carry out what he has promised against the inhabitants of Babylon.”
13 “O woman who resides on many waters, With abundant treasures, Your end has come, the limit of your profit-making.
14 Jehovah of armies has sworn by himself, ‘I will fill you with men, as numerous as locusts, And they will shout in triumph over you.’
15 He is the Maker of the earth by his power, The One who established the productive land by his wisdom And who stretched out the heavens by his understanding.
16 When he makes his voice heard, The waters in the heavens are in turmoil, And he causes clouds to ascend from the ends of the earth. He makes lightning for the rain, And he brings the wind out of his storehouses.
17 Every man acts unreasonably and without knowledge. Every metalworker will be put to shame because of the carved image; For his metal image is a falsehood, And there is no spirit in them.
18 They are a delusion, a work of mockery. When their day of reckoning comes, they will perish.
19 The Share of Jacob is not like these things, For he is the One who formed everything, Even the staff of his inheritance. Jehovah of armies is his name.”
20 “You are a war club for me, a weapon for battle, For with you I will smash nations. With you I will bring kingdoms to ruin.
21 With you I will smash the horse and its rider. With you I will smash the war chariot and its rider.
22 With you I will smash man and woman. With you I will smash old man and boy. With you I will smash young man and woman.
23 With you I will smash shepherd and his flock. With you I will smash farmer and his team of animals. With you I will smash governors and deputy rulers.
24 And I will repay Babylon and all the inhabitants of Chal·deʹa For all the evil that they have committed in Zion before your eyes,” declares Jehovah.
25 “Here I am against you, O destructive mountain,” declares Jehovah, “You destroyer of the whole earth. I will stretch out my hand against you and roll you down from the crags And make you a burned-out mountain.”
26 “People will not take from you a cornerstone or a foundation stone, Because you will become desolate forever,” declares Jehovah.
27 “Lift up a signal in the land. Blow a horn among the nations. Appoint the nations against her. Summon against her the kingdoms of Arʹa·rat, Minʹni, and Ashʹke·naz. Commission against her a recruiting officer. Make the horses come up like bristling locusts.
28 Appoint against her the nations, The kings of Meʹdi·a, its governors and all its deputy rulers And all the lands they rule over.
29 And the earth will quake and tremble, For the thoughts of Jehovah against Babylon will be carried out To make the land of Babylon an object of horror, without an inhabitant.
30 The warriors of Babylon have quit fighting. They sit in their strongholds. Their strength has failed. They have become like women. Her homes have been set on fire. Her bars have been broken.
31 One courier runs to meet another courier, And one messenger to meet another messenger, To report to the king of Babylon that his city has been captured on every side,
32 That the fords have been seized, That the papyrus boats have been burned with fire, And that the soldiers are terrified.”
33 For this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “The daughter of Babylon is like a threshing floor. It is the time to tread her down solid. Very soon the time of the harvest will come for her.”
34 “King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon has devoured me; He has thrown me into confusion. He has set me down as an empty vessel. He has swallowed me down like a big snake; He has filled his stomach with my fine things. He has rinsed me away.
35 ‘May the violence done to me and to my person come upon Babylon!’ says the inhabitant of Zion. ‘And let my blood come upon the inhabitants of Chal·deʹa!’ says Jerusalem.”
36 Therefore this is what Jehovah says: “Here I am pleading your legal case, And I will execute vengeance for you. I will dry up her sea and make her wells dry.
37 And Babylon will become piles of stones, A lair of jackals, An object of horror and something to whistle at, Without an inhabitant.
38 All together they will roar just like young lions. They will growl like lion cubs.”
39 “When they are inflamed, I will set out their banquet and make them drunk, In order that they may exult; Then they will sleep a lasting sleep, From which they will not wake up,” declares Jehovah.
40 “I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter, Like rams along with the goats.”
41 “O how Sheʹshach has been captured, How the Praise of the whole earth has been seized! How Babylon has become an object of horror among the nations!
42 The sea has come up over Babylon. By the multitude of its waves she has been covered.
43 Her cities have become an object of horror, a waterless land and a desert. A land where no one will live and where no man will pass through.
44 I will turn my attention to Bel in Babylon, And I will take out of his mouth what he has swallowed. To him nations will stream no more, And the wall of Babylon will fall.
45 Get out of her midst, my people! Escape for your lives from the burning anger of Jehovah!
46 Do not be fainthearted or afraid about the report to be heard in the land. In one year the report will come, And the next year another report, Of violence in the land and of ruler against ruler.
47 Therefore look! the days are coming When I will turn my attention to the graven images of Babylon. All her land will be put to shame, And all her slain will fall in her midst.
48 The heavens and the earth and everything in them Will shout joyfully over Babylon, For the destroyers will come to her out of the north,” declares Jehovah.
49 “Not only did Babylon cause the slain of Israel to fall But also at Babylon the slain ones of all the earth have fallen.
50 You who escape the sword, keep going, do not stand still! Remember Jehovah from far away, And may Jerusalem come up into your heart.”
51 “We have been put to shame, for we have heard taunts. Humiliation has covered our faces, For foreigners have come against the holy places of the house of Jehovah.”
52 “Therefore look! the days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “When I will turn my attention to her graven images, And throughout all her land the wounded will groan.”
53 “Even if Babylon should ascend to the heavens, Even if she should fortify her towering strongholds, From me her destroyers will come,” declares Jehovah.
54 “Listen! There is an outcry from Babylon, The sound of great disaster from the land of the Chal·deʹans,
55 For Jehovah is destroying Babylon, He will silence her great voice, And their waves will roar like many waters. The sound of their voice will be heard.
56 For the destroyer will come upon Babylon; Her warriors will be captured, Their bows will be shattered, For Jehovah is a God of retribution. He will surely repay.
57 I will make her princes and her wise men drunk, Her governors and her deputy rulers and her warriors, And they will sleep a lasting sleep, From which they will not wake up,” declares the King, whose name is Jehovah of armies.
58 This is what Jehovah of armies says: “The wall of Babylon, though broad, will be completely demolished, And her gates, though high, will be set on fire. The peoples will toil for nothing; The nations will weary themselves just to feed the fire.”
59 This is the word that Jeremiah the prophet gave as a command to Se·raiʹah son of Ne·riʹah son of Mah·seiʹah when he went with King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah to Babylon in the fourth year of his reign; Se·raiʹah was the quartermaster.
60 Jeremiah wrote in one book all the calamity that would come upon Babylon, all these words written against Babylon.
61 Furthermore, Jeremiah said to Se·raiʹah: “When you come to Babylon and see her, you must read aloud all these words.
62 Then say, ‘O Jehovah, you have said against this place that it will be destroyed and left without an inhabitant, man or beast, and that she will become desolate forever.’
63 And when you finish reading this book, tie a stone to it and throw it into the middle of the Eu·phraʹtes.
64 Then say, ‘This is how Babylon will sink down and never rise again because of the calamity that I am bringing on her; and they will grow weary.’” Down to this point are the words of Jeremiah.
1 How she now sits all alone, the city that was full of people! How she has become like a widow, she who was populous among the nations! How she who was a princess among the provinces has been put to forced labor!
2 She weeps profusely during the night, and her tears cover her cheeks. Not one of all her lovers is there to comfort her. All her own companions have betrayed her; they have become her enemies.
3 Judah has gone into exile under affliction and harsh slavery. She must dwell among the nations; she finds no resting-place. All her persecutors have overtaken her in her distress.
4 The roads to Zion are mourning, because no one is coming to the festival. All her gates are desolate; her priests are sighing. Her virgins are grieving, and she is in bitter anguish.
5 Her adversaries are now her master; her enemies are carefree. For Jehovah has brought grief to her because of her many transgressions. Her children have gone into captivity before the adversary.
6 All the splendor has departed from the daughter of Zion. Her princes are like stags that have found no pasture, And they walk exhausted before the pursuer.
7 In the days of her affliction and her homelessness, Jerusalem remembers All the precious things that were hers in the days of long ago. When her people fell into the hand of the adversary and she had no helper, The adversaries saw her and laughed over her collapse.
8 Jerusalem has sinned greatly. That is why she has become something abhorrent. All who used to honor her now treat her as something contemptible, for they have seen her nakedness. She herself groans and turns away in shame.
9 Her uncleanness is in her skirts. She gave no thought to her future. Her downfall was astounding; she has no one to comfort her. O Jehovah, see my affliction, for the enemy has magnified himself.
10 The adversary has laid his hands on all her treasures. For she has seen nations enter her sanctuary, Those whom you commanded should not enter into your congregation.
11 All her people are sighing; they are looking for bread. They have given their valuable things for something to eat, just to stay alive. Look, O Jehovah, and see that I have become as a worthless woman.
12 Is it nothing to all of you who pass along the road? Look and see! Is there any pain like the pain that was dealt out to me, Which Jehovah made me suffer in the day of his burning anger?
13 From on high he has sent fire into my bones, and he subdues each one. He has spread out a net for my feet; he has forced me to turn backward. He has made me a desolate woman. All day long I am ill.
14 My transgressions are bound as a yoke, fastened together by his hand. They have been placed on my neck, and my strength has failed. Jehovah has given me into the hand of those whom I cannot resist.
15 Jehovah has tossed aside all the powerful men in my midst. He has summoned an assembly against me to crush my young men. Jehovah has trodden the virgin daughter of Judah in the winepress.
16 I am weeping because of these things; my eyes flow with tears. For anyone who could comfort me or refresh me is far away from me. My sons are desolate, for the enemy has prevailed.
17 Zion has spread out her hands; she has no one to comfort her. Jehovah has given an order against Jacob to all his adversaries around him. Jerusalem has become to them an abhorrent thing.
18 Jehovah is righteous, for it is against his commands that I have rebelled. Listen, all you peoples, and see my pain. My virgins and my young men have gone into captivity.
19 I have called out to my lovers, but they have betrayed me. In the city my priests and my elders have perished, While they searched for food in order to stay alive.
20 See, O Jehovah, for I am in great distress. My insides are churning. My heart has turned over within me, for I have been completely rebellious. Outside the sword bereaves; inside the house it is like death.
21 People have heard my sighing; there is no one to comfort me. All my enemies have heard of my calamity. They are joyful, because you brought it about. But you will bring about the day that you proclaimed, when they will become like me.
22 May all their badness come before you, and may you deal harshly with them, Just as you have dealt harshly with me because of all my transgressions. For my sighs are many, and my heart is sick.
2 How Jehovah has covered the daughter of Zion in the cloud of his anger! He has thrown down the beauty of Israel from heaven to earth. He has not remembered his footstool in the day of his anger.
2 Jehovah has swallowed up without compassion all the dwellings of Jacob. In his fury he has torn down the fortified places of the daughter of Judah. He has brought down to the ground and profaned the kingdom and her princes.
3 In the heat of anger he has cut down all the strength of Israel. He withdrew his right hand when the enemy approached, And in Jacob he kept burning like a fire that consumed everything around it.
4 He has bent his bow like an enemy; his right hand is poised as an adversary; He kept killing all those desirable to the eyes. And he poured out his wrath like a fire into the tent of the daughter of Zion.
5 Jehovah has become like an enemy; He has swallowed down Israel. He has swallowed down all her towers; He has destroyed all its fortified places. And in the daughter of Judah he makes mourning and lamentation abound.
6 He treats his booth violently, like a hut in a garden. He has put an end to his festival. Jehovah has caused festival and sabbath to be forgotten in Zion, And in his fierce indignation he shows no regard for king and priest.
7 Jehovah has rejected his altar; He has spurned his sanctuary. He has surrendered the walls of her fortified towers into the hand of the enemy. They have raised their voice in the house of Jehovah, as on the day of a festival.
8 Jehovah has resolved to destroy the wall of the daughter of Zion. He has stretched out the measuring line. He has not held back his hand from bringing destruction. And he causes rampart and wall to mourn. Together they have been made weak.
9 Her gates have sunk down into the earth. He has destroyed and broken her bars. Her king and her princes are among the nations. There is no law; even her prophets find no vision from Jehovah.
10 The elders of the daughter of Zion sit on the ground in silence. They throw dust on their heads and wear sackcloth. The virgins of Jerusalem have bowed their heads down to the ground.
11 My eyes are worn out from shedding tears. My insides are churning. My liver has been poured out on the ground, because of the downfall of the daughter of my people, Because of the children and infants fainting away in the public squares of the town.
12 They keep asking their mothers, “Where are grain and wine?” As they faint away like someone wounded in the public squares of the city, As their life ebbs away in their mothers’ arms.
13 What can I use as a witness, Or to what can I liken you, O daughter of Jerusalem? To what can I compare you, to comfort you, O virgin daughter of Zion? For your breakdown is as vast as the sea. Who can heal you?
14 The visions your prophets saw for you were false and empty, And they did not expose your error in order to turn away your captivity, But they kept visioning for you false and misleading pronouncements.
15 At you all those passing by on the road scornfully clap their hands. They whistle in amazement and shake their heads at the daughter of Jerusalem, saying: “Is this the city about which they said, ‘It is perfect in beauty, the joy of all the earth’?”
16 At you all your enemies have opened their mouth. They whistle and grind their teeth and say: “We have swallowed her down. This is the day we were waiting for! It has arrived, and we have seen it!”
17 Jehovah has done what he intended; he has carried out his saying, What he commanded long ago. He has torn down without compassion. He has let the enemy rejoice over you; he has exalted the strength of your adversaries.
18 Their heart cries out to Jehovah, O wall of the daughter of Zion. Let tears stream down like a torrent day and night. Give yourself no respite, give your eye no rest.
19 Rise up! Cry out during the night, at the start of the watches. Pour out your heart like water before the face of Jehovah. Raise your hands to him for the lives of your children, Who are fainting away at every street corner because of famine.
20 See, O Jehovah, and look upon the one with whom you have dealt so harshly. Should women keep eating their own offspring, their own fully formed children, Or should priests and prophets be killed in the sanctuary of Jehovah?
21 Young boy and old man are lying dead on the ground in the streets. My virgins and my young men have fallen by the sword. You have killed in the day of your anger; you have slaughtered without compassion.
22 As if for a festival day, you summon terrors from every direction. In the day of the wrath of Jehovah, no one escaped or survived; Those whom I gave birth to and reared, my enemy exterminated.
3 I am the man who has seen affliction because of the rod of his fury.
2 He has driven me out and makes me walk in darkness, not in light.
3 Indeed, he repeatedly brings his hand against me all day long.
4 He has worn away my flesh and my skin; He has broken my bones.
5 He has besieged me; he has surrounded me with bitter poison and hardship.
6 He has forced me to sit in dark places, like men who died long ago.
7 He has walled me in, so that I cannot escape; He has bound me with heavy copper fetters.
8 And when I cry out desperately for help, he rejects my prayer.
9 He has blocked up my paths with hewn stones; He has made my roadways crooked.
10 He waits to ambush me like a bear, like a lion in hiding.
11 He has forced me off the paths and torn me to pieces; He has made me desolate.
12 He has bent his bow, and he sets me up as the target for the arrow.
13 He has pierced my kidneys with the arrows of his quiver.
14 I have become a laughingstock to all the peoples, the theme of their song all day long.
15 He has filled me with bitter things and saturated me with wormwood.
16 He breaks my teeth with gravel; He makes me cower in the ashes.
17 You deprive me of peace; I have forgotten what is good.
18 So I say: “My splendor has perished, as well as my expectation in Jehovah.”
19 Remember my affliction and my homeless state, the wormwood and the bitter poison.
20 You will surely remember and bow low over me.
21 I recall this in my heart; that is why I will show a waiting attitude.
22 It is because of Jehovah’s loyal love that we have not come to our finish, For his mercies never end.
23 They are new each morning; your faithfulness is abundant.
24 “Jehovah is my share,” I have said, “that is why I will show a waiting attitude for him.”
25 Good is Jehovah to the one hoping in him, to the person who keeps seeking him.
26 Good it is to wait in silence for the salvation of Jehovah.
27 Good it is for a man to carry the yoke during his youth.
28 Let him sit alone and keep silent when He lays it upon him.
29 Let him put his mouth in the very dust; there may yet be hope.
30 Let him give his cheek to the one striking him; let him have his fill of insults.
31 For Jehovah will not cast us off forever.
32 Although he has caused grief, he will also show mercy according to his abundant loyal love.
33 For it is not in his heart to afflict or grieve the sons of men.
34 To crush beneath one’s feet all the prisoners of the earth,
35 To deprive a man of justice in the presence of the Most High,
36 To defraud a man in his legal case —Jehovah does not tolerate such things.
37 Who, then, can speak and have it happen unless Jehovah commands it?
38 From the mouth of the Most High, Bad things and good things do not go out together.
39 Why should a living person complain about the consequences of his sin?
40 Let us examine and scrutinize our ways, and let us return to Jehovah.
41 Let us lift up our hearts along with our hands to God in the heavens:
42 “We have transgressed and rebelled, and you have not forgiven.
43 With anger you have blocked our approach; You have pursued and killed us without compassion.
44 You have blocked approach to yourself with a cloud, so that our prayer may not pass through.
45 You make us offscouring and refuse among the peoples.”
46 All our enemies open their mouths against us.
47 Dread and pitfalls have become our lot, desolation and breakdown.
48 Streams of water flow from my eyes over the breakdown of the daughter of my people.
49 My eyes weep without ceasing, without pausing,
50 Until Jehovah looks down and sees from heaven.
51 My eyes have brought me grief because of all the daughters of my city.
52 Without cause my enemies have hunted me down like a bird.
53 They have silenced my life in the pit; they kept hurling stones at me.
54 Waters flowed over my head, and I said: “I am finished!”
55 I called out your name, O Jehovah, from the depths of the pit.
56 Hear my voice; do not shut your ear to my cry for help, for relief.
57 You drew near in the day that I called you. You said: “Do not be afraid.”
58 You have defended my cause, O Jehovah, you have redeemed my life.
59 You have seen, O Jehovah, the wrong done to me; please grant me justice.
60 You have seen all their vengeance, all their schemes against me.  o
61 You have heard their taunts, O Jehovah, all their schemes against me,
62 The lips of my opposers and their whispering against me all day long.
63 Look at them; whether they sit or stand, they mock me in their songs!
64 You will repay them, O Jehovah, according to their deeds.
65 You will make them hardhearted, as your curse to them.
66 You will pursue them in your anger and annihilate them from under the heavens of Jehovah.
4 How the shining gold has grown dim, the fine gold! How the holy stones lie scattered at every street corner!
2 As for the precious sons of Zion, who were weighed against refined gold, How they have been regarded as earthenware jars, The work of a potter’s hands!
3 Even jackals offer the udder to nurse their young, But the daughter of my people has become cruel, like ostriches in the wilderness.
4 The tongue of the nursing infant sticks to its palate because of thirst. Children beg for bread, but no one gives them any.
5 Those who used to eat delicacies lie famished in the streets. Those who were brought up wearing scarlet have embraced ash heaps.
6 The punishment of the daughter of my people is greater than the punishment for the sin of Sodʹom, Which was overthrown in a moment, with no hand to help her.
7 Her Nazʹi·rites were purer than snow, whiter than milk. They were more ruddy than corals; they were like polished sapphires.
8 Their appearance has become darker than soot; They are not recognized in the streets. Their skin has shriveled over their bones; it has become like dry wood.
9 Those slain with the sword are better off than those slain by famine, Those who waste away, who are pierced through for lack of food from the field.
10 The hands of compassionate women have boiled their own children. They have become their food of mourning during the breakdown of the daughter of my people.
11 Jehovah has expressed his wrath; He has poured out his burning anger. And he starts a fire in Zion that consumes her foundations.
12 The kings of the earth and all the inhabitants of the productive land did not believe That the adversary and the enemy would enter the gates of Jerusalem.
13 It was because of the sins of her prophets, the errors of her priests, Who shed the blood of righteous ones in her midst.
14 They have wandered blindly in the streets. They are polluted with blood, So that none are able to touch their garments.
15 “Go away! Unclean!” they call out to them. “Go away! Go away! Do not touch us!” For they have gone homeless and wander about. People have said among the nations: “They cannot stay here with us.
16 The face of Jehovah has scattered them; He will no longer look favorably on them. Men will show no respect for the priests, no favor to the elders.”
17 Even now our eyes are worn out from looking in vain for help. We looked and looked for help from a nation that could not save us.
18 They have hunted us down at every step so that we could not walk in our public squares. Our end has drawn near; our days have finished, for our end has come.
19 Our pursuers were swifter than the eagles of the sky. They chased us on the mountains; they ambushed us in the wilderness.
20 The breath of our nostrils, the anointed one of Jehovah, has been captured in their large pit, The one of whom we said: “In his shade we will live among the nations.”
21 Exult and rejoice, O daughter of Eʹdom, living as you do in the land of Uz. But to you also the cup will be passed, and you will become drunk and expose your nakedness.
22 The punishment for your error, O daughter of Zion, has come to its finish. He will not carry you off into exile again. But he will turn his attention to your error, O daughter of Eʹdom. He will uncover your sins.
5 Remember, O Jehovah, what has befallen us. Look and see our disgrace.
2 Our inheritance has been turned over to strangers, our houses to foreigners.
3 We have become orphans without a father; our mothers are like widows.
4 We must pay to drink our own water, and our own wood comes at a price.
5 Those pursuing us are at our neck; We are weary, but we are given no rest.
6 We hold out our hand to Egypt and to As·syrʹi·a, to get enough bread to eat.
7 Our forefathers who sinned are no more, but we must bear their errors.
8 Servants now rule over us; there is no one to snatch us from their hand.
9 We bring in our bread at the risk of our life, because of the sword of the wilderness.
10 Our skin has become as hot as a furnace, because of the pangs of hunger.
11 The wives in Zion they have humiliated, the virgins in the cities of Judah.
12 Princes were hanged by their hand, and elders were shown no respect.
13 Young men carry the hand mill, and boys stumble under loads of wood.
14 The elders are gone from the city gate; young men do not play their music.
15 The joy is gone from our heart; our dancing has turned into mourning.
16 The crown has fallen from our head. Woe to us, because we have sinned!
17 Because of this our heart is sick, And because of these things our eyes have grown dim,
18 Because of Mount Zion, which is desolate; foxes now roam on it.
19 As for you, O Jehovah, you sit enthroned forever. Your throne is for generation after generation.
20 Why do you forget us forever and abandon us for so long a time?
21 Bring us back to yourself, O Jehovah, and we will readily return to you. Renew our days as in those of old.
22 However, you have utterly rejected us. You remain intensely angry with us.
1 In the 30th year, on the fifth day of the fourth month, while I was among the exiled people by the river Cheʹbar, the heavens were opened and I began to see visions of God.
2 On the fifth day of the month—that is, in the fifth year of the exile of King Je·hoiʹa·chin—
3 the word of Jehovah came to Ezekiel son of Buʹzi the priest by the river Cheʹbar in the land of the Chal·deʹans. There the hand of Jehovah came upon him.
4 As I was looking, I saw a tempestuous wind coming from the north, and there was a huge cloud and flashing fire surrounded by a bright light, and from the midst of the fire was something that looked like electrum.
5 Within it were what looked like four living creatures, and the appearance of each one was like that of a human.
6 Each one had four faces and four wings.
7 Their feet were straight, and the soles of their feet were like those of a calf, and they were shining like the glow of burnished copper.
8 They had human hands under their wings on all four sides, and the four of them had faces and wings.
9 Their wings were touching one another. They would not turn when they went; they would each go straight forward.
10 Their faces had this appearance: Each of the four had a man’s face with a lion’s face on the right, a bull’s face on the left, and each of the four had an eagle’s face.
11 That is how their faces were. Their wings were spread out above them. Each had two wings that were touching one another and two wings covering their bodies.
12 They would each go straight forward, going wherever the spirit would incline them to go. They would not turn as they went.
13 And the living creatures had the appearance of burning coals of fire, and something that looked like torches of bright fire was moving back and forth between the living creatures, and lightning was flashing out from the fire.
14 And when the living creatures would go forth and return, their movement had the appearance of flashes of lightning.
15 As I was watching the living creatures, I saw one wheel on the earth beside each of the living creatures with four faces.
16 The wheels and their structure appeared to glow like chrysʹo·lite, and the four of them looked alike. Their appearance and structure looked as though a wheel were within a wheel.
17 When they moved, they could go in any of the four directions without turning as they went.
18 Their rims were so high that they inspired awe, and the rims of all four were full of eyes all around.
19 Whenever the living creatures moved, the wheels would move along with them, and when the living creatures were lifted up from the earth, the wheels would also be lifted up.
20 They would go where the spirit inclined them to go, wherever the spirit went. The wheels would be lifted up together with them, for the spirit operating on the living creatures was also in the wheels.
21 When they moved, these would move; and when they stood still, these would stand still; and when they were lifted up from the earth, the wheels would be lifted up together with them, for the spirit operating on the living creatures was also in the wheels.
22 Over the heads of the living creatures was the likeness of an expanse that sparkled like awesome ice, stretched out above their heads.
23 Under the expanse their wings were straight, one to the other. Each one had two wings for covering one side of their bodies and two for covering the other side.
24 When I heard the sound of their wings, it was like a sound of rushing waters, like the sound of the Almighty. When they moved, it was like the sound of an army. When they stood still, they would let their wings down.
25 There was a voice above the expanse over their heads. (When they stood still, they would let their wings down.)
26 Above the expanse that was over their heads was what looked like a sapphire stone, and it resembled a throne. Sitting on the throne up above was someone whose appearance resembled that of a human.
27 I saw something glowing like electrum that was like a fire radiating from what appeared to be his waist and upward; and from his waist down, I saw something that resembled fire. There was a brilliance all around him
28 like that of a rainbow in a cloud on a rainy day. That was how the surrounding brilliant light appeared. It was like the appearance of the glory of Jehovah. When I saw it, I fell facedown and began to hear the voice of someone speaking.
2 He then said to me: “Son of man, stand up on your feet that I may speak with you.”
2 When he spoke to me, spirit came into me and made me stand up on my feet so that I could hear the One speaking to me.
3 He went on to say to me: “Son of man, I am sending you to the people of Israel, to rebellious nations that have rebelled against me. They and their forefathers have transgressed against me down to this very day.
4 I am sending you to sons who are defiant and hardhearted, and you must say to them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says.’
5 As for them, whether they listen or refuse to listen—for they are a rebellious house—they will certainly know that a prophet was among them.
6 “But you, son of man, do not be afraid of them, and do not be afraid of their words, although you are surrounded by briars and thorns and are dwelling among scorpions. Do not be afraid of their words, and do not be terrified by their faces, for they are a rebellious house.
7 You must speak my words to them, whether they listen or not, for they are a rebellious people.
8 “But you, son of man, listen to what I am telling you. Do not become rebellious like this rebellious house. Open your mouth and eat what I am giving you.”
9 When I looked, I saw a hand stretched out to me, and in it I saw a written scroll.
10 When he spread it out before me, it had writing on both front and back. Dirges and mourning and wailing were written on it.
3 Then he said to me: “Son of man, eat what is before you. Eat this scroll, and go, speak to the house of Israel.”
2 So I opened my mouth, and he made me eat this scroll.
3 He went on to say to me: “Son of man, eat this scroll that I am giving you, and fill your stomach with it.” So I began to eat it, and it was as sweet as honey in my mouth.
4 He said to me: “Son of man, go in among the house of Israel and speak my words to them.
5 For you are not being sent to a people who speak an unintelligible language or an unknown tongue, but to the house of Israel.
6 You are not being sent to many peoples speaking an unintelligible language or an unknown tongue, whose words you cannot understand. If I would send you to them, they would listen to you.
7 But the house of Israel will refuse to listen to you, for they do not want to listen to me. All those of the house of Israel are hardheaded and hardhearted.
8 Look! I have made your face exactly as hard as their faces and your forehead exactly as hard as their foreheads.
9 I have made your forehead like a diamond, harder than flint. Do not be afraid of them or be terrified by their faces, for they are a rebellious house.”
10 He went on to say to me: “Son of man, take to heart and listen to all my words that I speak to you.
11 Go in among the exiles of your people and speak to them. Tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says,’ whether they listen or refuse to listen.”
12 A spirit then carried me along and I heard behind me a great rumbling sound that said: “May the glory of Jehovah be praised from his place.”
13 There was the sound of the wings of the living creatures as they were brushing against one another, and the sound of the wheels next to them, and the sound of a great rumbling.
14 And the spirit carried me along and took me, and I went in bitterness and in the rage of my spirit, and the hand of Jehovah rested strongly on me.
15 So I went to the exiled people at Tel-aʹbib, who were dwelling by the river Cheʹbar, and I stayed there where they were dwelling; and in a dazed condition, I stayed among them for seven days.
16 At the end of seven days the word of Jehovah came to me:
17 “Son of man, I have appointed you as a watchman to the house of Israel; and when you hear a word from my mouth, you must warn them from me.
18 When I say to someone wicked, ‘You will surely die,’ but you do not warn him, and you fail to speak in order to warn the wicked one to turn from his wicked course so that he may stay alive, he will die for his error because he is wicked, but I will ask his blood back from you.
19 But if you warn someone wicked and he does not turn back from his wickedness and from his wicked course, he will die for his error, but you will certainly save your own life.
20 But when someone righteous abandons his righteousness and does what is wrong, I will put a stumbling block before him and he will die. If you did not warn him, he will die for his sin and his righteous acts will not be remembered, but I will ask his blood back from you.
21 But if you have warned the righteous one not to sin, and he does not sin, he will surely keep alive because he was warned, and you will have saved your own life.”
22 The hand of Jehovah came upon me there, and he said to me: “Get up, go to the valley plain, and I will speak with you there.”
23 So I got up and went to the valley plain, and look! the glory of Jehovah was there, like the glory that I saw by the river Cheʹbar, and I fell facedown.
24 Then spirit entered into me and made me stand up on my feet, and he spoke to me and said: “Go, shut yourself inside your house.
25 As for you, son of man, they will put ropes on you and tie you with them so that you cannot go out among them.
26 And I will make your tongue stick to the roof of your mouth, and you will become mute, unable to reprove them, because they are a rebellious house.
27 But when I speak with you I will open your mouth, and you must say to them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says.’ Let the one listening listen, and let the one refusing to listen refuse, because they are a rebellious house.
5 “As for you, son of man, take a sharp sword for yourself to use as a barber’s razor. Shave your head and your beard, and then take scales to weigh and divide the hair into portions.
2 You will burn a third of it in the fire inside the city when the days of the siege are completed. Then you will take another third and strike it with the sword all around the city, and the last third you will scatter to the wind, and I will draw a sword to chase after them.
3 “You must also take a few strands of them and wrap them up in the folds of your garment.
4 And take some more of them and throw them into the fire and incinerate them. From this a fire will spread to all the house of Israel.
5 “This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘This is Jerusalem. I have set her in the middle of the nations, with lands all around her.
6 But she has rebelled against my judicial decisions and my statutes, acting more wickedly than the nations and the lands all around her. For they have rejected my judicial decisions, and they did not walk in my statutes.’
7 “Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because you were more troublesome than the nations all around you and you did not walk in my statutes or carry out my judicial decisions but, instead, you followed the judicial decisions of the nations all around you,
8 this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am against you, O city, and I myself will execute judgment in your midst before the eyes of the nations.
9 I will do in you what I have never done before, and the likes of which I will not do again, because of all your detestable practices.
10 “‘“So fathers among you will eat their sons, and sons will eat their fathers, and I will execute judgment among you and scatter all the rest of you in every direction.”’
11 “‘Therefore as surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘because it was my sanctuary that you defiled with all your disgusting idols and with all your detestable practices, I will also reject you; my eye will not feel sorry, and I will show no compassion.
12 A third of you will die by the pestilence or perish in your midst by famine. Another third will fall all around you by the sword. And I will scatter the last third in every direction, and I will draw a sword to chase after them.
13 Then my anger will come to an end, and my wrath against them will subside, and I will be satisfied. And they will have to know that I, Jehovah, have spoken in my insistence on exclusive devotion, when I have finished unleashing my wrath against them.
14 “‘I will make you a devastated place and an object of reproach among the surrounding nations and in the eyes of everyone passing by.
15 You will become an object of reproach and scorn, a warning example and a horror to the nations around you, when I execute judgment on you in anger and in wrath and with furious punishments. I, Jehovah, have spoken.
16 “‘I will send against them the deadly arrows of famine to destroy them. The arrows that I send will bring you to ruin. I will make the famine worse for you by cutting off your food supply.
17 I will send against you famine and vicious wild beasts, and they will bereave you of children. Pestilence and bloodshed will overwhelm you, and I will bring a sword against you. I, Jehovah, have spoken.’”
6 The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
2 “Son of man, turn your face toward the mountains of Israel and prophesy against them.
3 You must say, ‘O mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah: This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says to the mountains, to the hills, to the streams, and to the valleys: “Look! I will bring a sword against you, and I will destroy your high places.
4 Your altars will be demolished, your incense stands will be broken, and I will throw your slain ones down before your disgusting idols.
5 I will throw the carcasses of the people of Israel before their disgusting idols, and I will scatter your bones all around your altars.
6 In all the places where you dwell, the cities will be devastated and the high places will be demolished and will lie devastated. Your altars will be demolished and shattered, your disgusting idols will perish, your incense stands will be cut down, and your works will be wiped out.
7 And those slain will fall in your midst, and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.
8 “‘“But I will leave a remnant, for some of you will escape the sword among the nations when you are scattered throughout the lands.
9 And those who escape will remember me among the nations where they are taken captive. They will realize that I was brokenhearted over their unfaithful heart that turned away from me and at their eyes that are lusting after their disgusting idols. They will be ashamed of and loathe all the evil and detestable things they have done.
10 They will have to know that I am Jehovah and that my threats to bring this calamity on them were not empty.”’
11 “This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Clap your hands and stamp your foot and bemoan all the evil and detestable things done by the house of Israel, for they will fall by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence.
12 The one far away will die by pestilence, the one nearby will fall by the sword, and whoever escapes these and is left remaining will die by famine; and I will fully unleash my wrath against them.
13 And you will have to know that I am Jehovah, when their slain lie among their disgusting idols, all around their altars, on every high hill, on all the mountaintops, under every luxuriant tree, and under the branches of big trees where they have made fragrant offerings to appease all their disgusting idols.
14 I will stretch out my hand against them and make the land desolate, and all their dwelling places will become more desolate than the wilderness near Dibʹlah. And they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’”
7 The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
2 “As for you, son of man, this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says to the land of Israel: ‘An end! The end has come upon the four corners of the land.
3 The end is now upon you, and I will unleash my anger against you, and I will judge you according to your ways and call you to account for all your detestable deeds.
4 My eye will not feel sorry for you; nor will I feel compassion, for I will bring upon you the results of your own ways, and you will suffer the consequences of your detestable deeds. And you will have to know that I am Jehovah.’
5 “This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Look! A calamity, a unique calamity, is coming.
6 An end is coming; the end will come; it will rouse itself against you. Look! It is coming.
7 Your turn has come, you who inhabit the land. The time is coming, the day is near. There is confusion and not joyful shouting on the mountains.
8 “‘Very soon I will pour out my rage on you, and I will fully unleash my anger against you, and I will judge you according to your ways and call you to account for all your detestable deeds.
9 My eye will not feel sorry; nor will I feel compassion. I will bring on you the results of your ways, and you will suffer the consequences of your own detestable deeds. And you will have to know that I, Jehovah, am striking you.
10 “‘Look, the day! Look, it is coming! Your turn has come; the rod has blossomed and presumptuousness has sprouted.
11 Violence has grown into a rod of wickedness. Neither they nor their wealth nor their crowds nor their prominence will survive.
12 The time will come, the day will arrive. Let the buyer not rejoice, and let the seller not mourn, for there is wrath against their whole crowd.
13 For the seller will not return to what was sold, even if his life is spared, for the vision is against the entire multitude. No one will return, and because of his error, no one will preserve his life.
14 “‘They have blown the trumpet, and everyone is ready, but no one is going to the battle, because my wrath is against the whole multitude.
15 The sword is outside, and the pestilence and the famine are inside. Whoever is in the field will die by the sword, and famine and pestilence will consume those in the city.
16 Their survivors who manage to escape will go to the mountains, and like the doves of the valleys, each one will moan over his error.
17 All their hands will hang limp, and all their knees will drip with water.
18 They have put on sackcloth, and shuddering has seized them. Everyone will be put to shame, and every head will be bald.
19 “‘They will throw their silver into the streets, and their gold will become abhorrent to them. Neither their silver nor their gold will be able to save them in the day of Jehovah’s fury. They will not be satisfied, nor will they fill their stomachs, for it has become a stumbling block causing their error.
20 They took pride in the beauty of their ornaments, and they made with them their detestable images, their disgusting idols. That is why I will make it an abhorrent thing to them.
21 I will give it into the hand of the foreigners for plunder and to the wicked ones of the earth for spoil, and they will profane it.
22 “‘I will turn my face away from them, and they will profane my concealed place, and robbers will enter it and profane it.
23 “‘Make the chain, for the land is full of bloodstained judgment and the city is full of violence.
24 I will bring in the worst of the nations, and they will take possession of their houses, and I will put an end to the pride of the strong ones, and their sanctuaries will be profaned.
25 When their anguish comes, they will seek peace, but there will be none.
26 There will come disaster upon disaster, and one report after another, and people will seek a vision from a prophet, but the law will perish from a priest and advice from the elders.
27 The king will go into mourning, and the chieftain will be clothed with despair, and the hands of the people of the land will tremble in terror. I will treat them according to their ways, and I will judge them as they have judged. And they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’”
9 He then called out in my ears with a loud voice, saying: “Summon those who will bring punishment on the city, each one with his weapon for destruction in his hand!”
2 I saw six men coming from the direction of the upper gate that faces north, each with his weapon for smashing in his hand; and there was one man among them clothed in linen, with a secretary’s inkhorn at his waist, and they came in and stood beside the copper altar.
3 Then the glory of the God of Israel rose from where it had rested above the cherubs and moved to the threshold of the doorway of the house, and he began calling out to the man who was clothed in linen, at whose waist was the secretary’s inkhorn.
4 Jehovah said to him: “Go through the city, through Jerusalem, and put a mark on the foreheads of the men who are sighing and groaning over all the detestable things that are being done in the city.”
5 And to the others he said in my hearing: “Go through the city after him and strike. Do not let your eye feel sorry, and do not feel any compassion.
6 Old man, young man, virgin, little child, and women you should kill off completely. But do not go near to any man on whom there is the mark. You should start from my sanctuary.” So they started with the elders who were in front of the house.
7 Then he said to them: “Defile the house and fill the courtyards with the slain. Go!” So they went out and struck down people in the city.
8 While they were striking them down, I alone was left, and I fell facedown and cried out: “Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah! Are you going to destroy all the remaining ones of Israel while you pour out your rage on Jerusalem?”
9 So he said to me: “The error of the house of Israel and Judah is very, very great. The land is filled with bloodshed, and the city is full of corruption. For they say, ‘Jehovah has left the land, and Jehovah is not seeing.’
10 But as for me, my eye will not feel sorry; nor will I show compassion. The consequences of their way I will bring down on their own head.”
11 Then I saw the man clothed in linen with the inkhorn at his waist bringing back word, saying: “I have done just as you have commanded me.”
10 As I was watching, I saw above the expanse that was over the heads of the cherubs something like a sapphire stone appearing above them, and its appearance resembled a throne.
2 Then he said to the man clothed in linen: “Enter between the wheelwork, under the cherubs, and fill both your hands with burning coals from between the cherubs and toss them over the city.” So he entered as I watched.
3 The cherubs were standing to the right of the house when the man entered, and the cloud filled the inner courtyard.
4 And the glory of Jehovah rose up from the cherubs to the threshold of the doorway of the house, and the house gradually became filled with the cloud, and the courtyard was full of the brightness of the glory of Jehovah.
5 And the sound of the wings of the cherubs could be heard in the outer courtyard, like the sound of God Almighty when he speaks.
6 Then he commanded the man clothed in linen: “Take fire from between the wheelwork, from between the cherubs,” and he entered and stood beside the wheel.
7 Then one of the cherubs stretched his hand out toward the fire that was between the cherubs. He took some and put it into both hands of the one clothed in linen, who now took it and went out.
8 The cherubs had what looked like the form of human hands under their wings.
9 As I was watching, I saw four wheels beside the cherubs, one wheel beside each cherub, and the wheels appeared to glow like chrysʹo·lite stone.
10 As for their appearance, the four of them were alike, looking as though a wheel were within a wheel.
11 When they moved, they could go in any of the four directions without turning, because they would go to the place where the head would face without turning.
12 Their entire bodies, their backs, their hands, their wings, and the wheels, the wheels of all four of them, were full of eyes all around.
13 As regards the wheels, I heard a voice that called to them, “Wheelwork!”
14 Each one had four faces. The first face was the face of the cherub, the second face was the face of a man, the third was the face of a lion, and the fourth was the face of an eagle.
15 And the cherubs would rise—they were the same living creatures that I had seen at the river Cheʹbar—
16 and when the cherubs moved, the wheels would move alongside them; and when the cherubs lifted up their wings to be high above the earth, the wheels would not turn or move from their side.
17 When these stood still, they would stand still; and when these rose, they would rise with them, for the spirit operating on the living creatures was in them.
18 Then the glory of Jehovah departed from over the threshold of the doorway of the house and stood still over the cherubs.
19 The cherubs now lifted up their wings and rose from the earth as I watched. The wheels were also alongside them when they departed. They stopped at the entrance of the eastern gate of the house of Jehovah, and the glory of the God of Israel was above them.
20 These were the living creatures that I had seen under the God of Israel at the river Cheʹbar, so I came to know that they were cherubs.
21 All four had four faces, four wings, and what appeared to be human hands under their wings.
22 And the appearances of their faces were like the faces I had seen by the river Cheʹbar. They would each go straight forward.
12 The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
2 “Son of man, you are living in a rebellious house. They have eyes to see, but they do not see, and ears to hear, but they do not hear, for they are a rebellious house.
3 As for you, son of man, prepare for yourself luggage for going into exile. Then, during the day while they are watching, you must go into exile. Go into exile from your home to another place while they are watching. Perhaps they will take notice, even though they are a rebellious house.
4 Bring out your luggage packed for going into exile during the day while they are watching, and then in the evening while they are watching, you should leave like someone being taken into exile.
5 “While they are watching, bore a hole in the wall, and carry your belongings out through it.
6 While they are watching, put your belongings on your shoulder and carry them out in the darkness. Cover your face so that you cannot see the ground, for I am making you a sign to the house of Israel.”
7 I did just as I was commanded. During the day I brought out my luggage as luggage for going into exile, and in the evening I bored a hole through the wall by hand. And when it was dark, I took out my belongings, carrying them on my shoulder right before their eyes.
8 In the morning the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
9 “Son of man, did not the house of Israel, the rebellious house, ask you, ‘What are you doing?’
10 Tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “This pronouncement concerns the chieftain in Jerusalem and all the house of Israel within the city.”’
11 “Say, ‘I am a sign for you. Just as I have done, that is what will be done to them. They will go into exile, into captivity.
12 The chieftain who is among them will carry his belongings on his shoulder and leave in the darkness. He will bore a hole in the wall and carry his belongings out through it. He will cover his face so that he cannot see the ground.’
13 I will cast my net over him, and he will be caught in my hunting net. Then I will bring him to Babylon, to the land of the Chal·deʹans, but he will not see it; and there he will die.
14 And all those around him, his helpers and his troops, I will scatter in every direction; and I will draw out a sword to chase after them.
15 And they will have to know that I am Jehovah when I disperse them among the nations and I scatter them among the lands.
16 But I will spare a few of them from the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, so that they may tell about all their detestable practices among the nations where they will go; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.”
17 And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
18 “Son of man, you should eat your bread with trembling and drink your water with agitation and anxiety.
19 Say to the people of the land, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says to the inhabitants of Jerusalem in the land of Israel: “They will eat their bread with anxiety and drink their water with horror, for their land will become completely desolate because of the violence of all those dwelling in it.
20 The inhabited cities will be devastated, and the land will become a wasteland; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.”’”
21 And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
22 “Son of man, what is this proverb that you have in Israel that says, ‘The days go by, and every vision comes to nothing’?
23 Therefore say to them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I will cause this saying to cease, and they will no more use it as a proverb in Israel.”’ But tell them, ‘The days are near, and every vision will take place.’
24 For there will no longer be any false vision or flattering divination within the house of Israel.
25 ‘“For I, Jehovah, will speak. Whatever word I speak will be done without any more delay. In your days, O rebellious house, I will say the word and carry it out,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.’”
26 The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
27 “Son of man, this is what the people of Israel are saying, ‘The vision that he sees is for a long time from now, and he is prophesying about the distant future.’
28 Therefore say to them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “‘None of my words will be delayed; whatever I say will be done,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”’”
13 And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
2 “Son of man, prophesy against the prophets of Israel, and say to those who fabricate their own prophecies, ‘Hear the word of Jehovah.
3 This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Woe to the stupid prophets, who follow their own spirit, when they have seen nothing!
4 O Israel, your prophets have become like foxes among the ruins.
5 You will not go to the broken places in the stone walls to rebuild them for the house of Israel, so that Israel may keep standing in the battle in the day of Jehovah.”
6 “They have seen false visions and foretold a lie, those who are saying, ‘The word of Jehovah is,’ when Jehovah himself has not sent them, and they have waited for their word to come true.
7 Is it not a false vision that you have seen and a lie that you have foretold when you say, ‘The word of Jehovah is,’ when I have not said anything?”’
8 “‘Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “‘Because you have spoken what is false and your visions are a lie, I am against you,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
9 My hand is against the prophets whose visions are false and who foretell a lie. They will not be among the people with whom I confide; nor will they be written in the registry of the house of Israel; nor will they return to the land of Israel; and you will have to know that I am the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
10 All of this is because they have led my people astray by saying, “There is peace!” when there is no peace. When a flimsy partition wall is built, they are plastering it with whitewash.’
11 “Tell those plastering with whitewash that it will fall. A torrential downpour will come, hailstones will fall, and powerful windstorms will break it down.
12 And when the wall falls you will be asked, ‘Where is your coating of plaster?’
13 “Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘I will cause powerful windstorms to burst forth in my wrath, and a torrential downpour in my anger, and hailstones in destructive fury.
14 I will tear down the wall that you plastered with whitewash and bring it down to the earth, and its foundation will be exposed. When the city falls, you will perish within her; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.’
15 “‘When I fully unleash my wrath upon the wall and upon those who plastered it with whitewash, I will say to you: “The wall is no more, and those plastering it are no more.
16 The prophets of Israel are gone, those who prophesy to Jerusalem and who see visions of peace for her, when there is no peace,”’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
17 “As for you, son of man, set your face against the daughters of your people who fabricate their own prophecies, and prophesy against them.
18 Tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Woe to the women who sew together bands for all arms and make veils for heads of every size in order to hunt down people’s lives! Are you hunting for the lives of my people and trying to preserve your own lives?
19 Will you profane me among my people for handfuls of barley and for scraps of bread, putting to death those who should not die and keeping alive those who should not live, doing so by your lies to my people, who listen to your lies?”’
20 “Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Here I am against your bands, O women, which you use to hunt down people as though they were birds, and I will rip them from your arms and release those whom you are hunting down like birds.
21 I will rip away your veils and rescue my people out of your hand, and they will no longer be something for you to catch in the hunt; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.
22 For you have disheartened the righteous one with your falsehood when I was not causing him distress, and you have strengthened the hands of the wicked one, so that he does not turn back from his bad way and stay alive.
23 Therefore, you women will no longer see false visions and practice divination; and I will rescue my people from your hand, and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.’”
14 And some of the elders of Israel came and sat down before me.
2 Then the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
3 “Son of man, these men are determined to follow their disgusting idols, and they have set up a stumbling block that causes people to sin. Should I let them inquire of me?
4 Now speak with them and tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “If an Israelite is determined to follow his disgusting idols and sets up a stumbling block causing people to sin and he then comes to inquire of a prophet, I, Jehovah, will answer him appropriately according to his many disgusting idols.
5 For I will cause terror in the hearts of the house of Israel because they have all withdrawn from me and have gone after their disgusting idols.”’
6 “So tell the house of Israel, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Come back and turn away from your disgusting idols and turn your faces away from all your detestable practices.
7 For if any Israelite or foreign resident living in Israel separates himself from me and is determined to follow his disgusting idols and sets up a stumbling block that causes people to sin and then comes to inquire of my prophet, I, Jehovah, I will personally answer him.
8 I will set my face against that man and make him a warning sign and a proverbial saying, and I will cut him off from my people; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.”’
9 “‘But if the prophet is fooled and gives a response, it is I, Jehovah, who have fooled that prophet. I will then stretch out my hand against him and annihilate him from my people Israel.
10 They will have to bear their guilt; the guilt of the inquirer will be the same as the guilt of the prophet,
11 so that the house of Israel may stop wandering away from me and stop defiling themselves by all their transgressions. And they will be my people, and I will be their God,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
12 And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
13 “Son of man, if a land sins against me by acting unfaithfully, I will stretch out my hand against it and destroy its food supply, and I will send famine upon it and cut off man and animal from it.”
14 “‘Even if these three men—Noah, Daniel, and Job—were within it, they would be able to save only themselves because of their righteousness,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
15 “‘Or suppose I make vicious wild animals pass through the land and they depopulate it and make it a wasteland without anyone passing through because of the wild animals.
16 As surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘even if these three men were in it, they would save neither their sons nor their daughters; they would save only themselves, and the land would become desolate.’”
17 “‘Or suppose I bring a sword against that land and say: “Let a sword pass through the land,” and cut off from it both man and animal,
18 even if these three men were in it, as surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘they would save neither their sons nor their daughters; they would save only themselves.’”
19 “‘Or suppose I send a pestilence into that land and pour out my rage on it with bloodshed to cut off from it man and animal,
20 even if Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, as surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘they would save neither their sons nor their daughters; they would save only themselves because of their righteousness.’”
21 “For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘So it will be when I send my four punishments—sword, famine, vicious wild animal, and pestilence—against Jerusalem to cut off man and animal from it.
22 However, some left in it will escape and be brought out, both sons and daughters. They are coming to you, and when you see their ways and their deeds, you will certainly be comforted over the calamity that I brought on Jerusalem, over everything that I did to it.’”
23 “‘They will comfort you when you see their ways and their deeds, and you will know that it was not without cause that I did what I had to do to it,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
15 The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
2 “Son of man, how does the wood of the vine compare with that of any other tree or branch from the trees of the forest?
3 Can a pole from it be used to do work? Or do people make a peg from it to hang utensils on?
4 Look! It is thrown into the fire for fuel, and the fire consumes both ends and scorches the middle. Is it now fit for any work?
5 Even when it was whole, it could not be used for anything. How much less useful it will be when the fire has consumed and scorched it!”
6 “Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Just like the wood of the vine among the trees of the forest, which I have given as fuel for the fire, so I will deal with the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
7 I have set my face against them. They have escaped from the fire, but fire will consume them. And you will have to know that I am Jehovah when I set my face against them.’”
8 “‘And I will make the land desolate because they have acted unfaithfully,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
16 The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
2 “Son of man, make known to Jerusalem her detestable practices.
3 You must say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says to Jerusalem: “Your origin and your birth were in the land of the Caʹnaan·ite. Your father was an Amʹor·ite, and your mother was a Hitʹtite.
4 As for your birth, on the day you were born, your umbilical cord was not cut, you were not washed in water to make you clean, you were not rubbed with salt, and you were not wrapped in cloths.
5 No one pitied you enough to do any of these things. No one had compassion for you. Instead, you were thrown into the open field because you were hated on the day you were born.
6 “‘“When I was passing by, I saw you kicking about in your own blood, and as you lay there in your blood, I said: ‘Keep living!’ Yes, I said to you lying there in your blood: ‘Keep living!’
7 I made you a very great multitude, like plants sprouting in the field, and you grew up and developed and wore the finest ornaments. Your breasts became firm, and your hair grew; but you were still naked and exposed.”’
8 “‘When I was passing by and saw you, I noticed that you were old enough for expressions of love. So I spread my garment over you and covered your nakedness and made an oath and entered into a covenant with you,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘and you became mine.
9 Furthermore, I washed you with water and rinsed away your blood and put oil on you.
10 I then clothed you with an embroidered garment and gave you fine leather sandals and wrapped you in fine linen, and I clothed you with costly garments.
11 I adorned you with ornaments and put bracelets on your hands and a necklace around your neck.
12 I also put a ring in your nose and earrings on your ears and a beautiful crown on your head.
13 You kept adorning yourself with gold and silver, and your clothing was fine linen, costly material, and an embroidered garment. Fine flour, honey, and oil were what you ate, and you grew to be extremely beautiful, and you became fit to be a queen.’”
14 “‘Your fame began to spread among the nations because of your beauty, for it was perfect because my own splendor I placed upon you,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
15 “‘But you began to trust in your beauty, and you became a prostitute because of your fame. You lavished your acts of prostitution on everyone passing by, and your beauty became his.
16 You took some of your garments and made colorful high places where you prostituted yourself—such things should not take place, nor should they ever happen.
17 You also took your beautiful jewelry made from the gold and silver that I had given to you and you made for yourself male images and prostituted yourself with them.
18 And you took your embroidered garments and covered them, and you offered them my oil and my incense.
19 And the bread that I had given to you—made from fine flour, oil, and honey that I gave you to eat—you also offered to them as a pleasing aroma. That is exactly what happened,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
20 “‘You took your sons and your daughters whom you had borne to me, and you sacrificed these to idols to be devoured—have your acts of prostitution not gone far enough?
21 You slaughtered my sons, and you offered them as sacrifices by making them pass through the fire.
22 While engaging in all your detestable practices and acts of prostitution, you did not remember the days of your youth when you were naked and exposed, kicking about in your own blood.
23 After all your evil, woe, woe to you,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
24 ‘You built yourself a mound and made a high place for yourself in every public square.
25 You built your high places at the most prominent place of every street, and you turned your beauty into something detestable by offering yourself to everyone passing by, and you multiplied your acts of prostitution.
26 You prostituted yourself to the sons of Egypt, your lustful neighbors, and you offended me with your countless acts of prostitution.
27 Now I will bring my hand against you and diminish your food allowance and give you over to the will of the women who hate you, the daughters of the Phi·lisʹtines, who were appalled because of your obscene conduct.
28 “‘Because you could not be satisfied, you then prostituted yourself to the sons of As·syrʹi·a, but after prostituting yourself to them, you still did not find satisfaction.
29 So you increased your prostitution toward the land of traders and toward the Chal·deʹans, but even then you did not find satisfaction.
30 How sick your heart was,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘when you did all these things, behaving like a brazen prostitute!
31 But when you built your mound at the most prominent place of every street and made your high place in every public square, you were not like a prostitute, because you refused any payment.
32 You are an adulterous wife who takes strangers instead of her own husband!
33 People give all prostitutes a gift, but you are the one who has given gifts to all those lusting after you, and you bribe them to come to you from all around to commit prostitution.
34 You are the opposite of other women who engage in prostitution. No one commits prostitution your way! You pay others, and they do not pay you. Your way is the opposite.’
35 “Therefore, O prostitute, hear the word of Jehovah.
36 This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because your lust has been poured out and your nakedness has been exposed during your prostitution with your lovers and all your detestable, disgusting idols to which you even sacrificed the blood of your sons,
37 therefore I am collecting together all the lovers you have given pleasure to, all those you loved together with all those you hated. I will collect them together against you from all around and expose your nakedness to them, and they will see you completely naked.
38 “‘And I will punish you with the judgments that adulteresses and women shedding blood deserve, and your blood will be shed in rage and jealousy.
39 I will give you into their hand, and they will tear down your mounds, and your high places will be pulled down; and they will strip you of your garments and take your beautiful jewelry and leave you naked and exposed.
40 They will bring against you a crowd, and they will stone you and will slaughter you with their swords.
41 They will burn your houses with fire and execute judgment on you before the eyes of many women; and I will bring an end to your prostitution, and you will stop giving payment.
42 I will satisfy my rage against you, and my indignation will turn away from you; and I will be calm and no longer feel offended.’
43 “‘Because you did not remember the days of your youth and you have angered me by doing all these things, I will now bring the consequences of your ways on your own head,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘and you will no longer carry on your obscene conduct and all your detestable practices.
44 “‘Look! Everyone who uses proverbs will apply this proverb to you: “Like mother, like daughter!”
45 You are the daughter of your mother, who despised her husband and her children. And you are the sister of your sisters, who despised their husbands and their children. Your mother was a Hitʹtite, and your father was an Amʹor·ite.’”
46 “‘Your older sister is Sa·marʹi·a, who is dwelling to the north of you with her daughters, and your younger sister, who is dwelling to the south of you, is Sodʹom with her daughters.
47 Not only did you walk in their ways and follow their detestable practices, but in a short while you were even more corrupt in all your conduct than they were.
48 As surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘Sodʹom your sister and her daughters have not done what you and your daughters have done.
49 Look! This was the error of Sodʹom your sister: She and her daughters were proud and had an abundance of food and carefree tranquillity; yet they did not support the afflicted and the poor.
50 They remained haughty and carried on detestable practices in my sight, so I found it necessary to remove them.
51 “‘Nor did Sa·marʹi·a commit even half as many sins as you did. You kept making your detestable practices abound more than they have, to the point that your sisters appeared righteous because of all your detestable practices.
52 You must now bear your humiliation because you have justified the behavior of your sisters. On account of your sin of acting more detestably than they have, they are more righteous than you. So now, be ashamed and bear the humiliation of making your sisters appear righteous.’
53 “‘And I will gather their captives, the captives of Sodʹom and her daughters and the captives of Sa·marʹi·a and her daughters; I will also gather your captives along with them,
54 so that you may bear your humiliation; and you will feel humiliated because of what you have done by comforting them.
55 Your own sisters, Sodʹom and her daughters, will return to their former state, and Sa·marʹi·a and her daughters will return to their former state, and you along with your own daughters will return to your former state.
56 Sodʹom your sister was not worthy of your mention in the day of your pride,
57 before your own wickedness was exposed. Now the daughters of Syria and her neighbors reproach you, and the daughters of the Phi·lisʹtines, those all around you, treat you with scorn.
58 You will bear the consequences of your obscene conduct and your detestable practices,’ declares Jehovah.”
59 “For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘I will now do with you just as you have done, for you despised the oath by breaking my covenant.
60 But I myself will remember the covenant that I made with you in the days of your youth, and I will establish with you a permanent covenant.
61 You will remember your behavior and feel humiliated when you welcome your sisters, those older than you as well as those younger than you, and I will give them to you as daughters, but not because of your covenant.’
62 “‘And I myself will establish my covenant with you; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.
63 Then you will remember and be too ashamed to open your mouth because of your humiliation, when I make an atonement for you despite all that you have done,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
17 The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
2 “Son of man, tell a riddle and relate a proverb about the house of Israel.
3 You must say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “The great eagle, with great wings, long pinions, and full, colorful plumage, came to Lebʹa·non and took the top of the cedar.
4 He plucked off its topmost shoot and brought it to the land of traders and set it down in a city of traders.
5 He then took some of the seed of the land and put it in a fertile field. He planted it like a willow by abundant waters.
6 So it sprouted and became a low, sprawling vine with its foliage facing inward and its roots growing under it. Thus it became a vine and produced shoots and sent out branches.
7 “‘“And there came another great eagle, with great wings and large pinions. This vine then stretched its roots eagerly toward him, away from the garden beds where it was planted, and it sent out its foliage toward him so that he would irrigate it.
8 It had already been planted in a good field near abundant waters, in order to produce branches, to bear fruit, and to become a majestic vine.”’
9 “Say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Will it prosper? Will someone not tear out its roots and make its fruit rot and cause its sprouts to wither? It will become so dry that neither a strong arm nor many people will be needed to pull it up by the roots.
10 Although it is transplanted, will it prosper? Will it not dry up completely when the east wind blows on it? It will dry up in the garden bed where it sprouted.”’”
11 And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
12 “Please tell the rebellious house, ‘Do you not realize what these things mean?’ Say, ‘Look! The king of Babylon came to Jerusalem and took its king and its princes and brought them back with him to Babylon.
13 Furthermore, he took one of the royal offspring and made a covenant with him and put him under an oath. Then he took away the prominent men of the land,
14 so that the kingdom would be brought low, unable to rise up, so that only by keeping his covenant might it continue to exist.
15 But the king finally rebelled against him by sending his messengers to Egypt to obtain horses and a large army from them. Will he succeed? Will the one doing these things escape punishment? Can he break the covenant and still escape?’
16 “‘“As surely as I am alive,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, “he will die in Babylon, in the place where the king who made him king lives, the one whose oath he despised and whose covenant he broke.
17 And the great army and numerous troops of Pharʹaoh will be of no help in the war, when siege ramparts are raised and siege walls are built to destroy many lives.
18 He has despised an oath and broken a covenant. Even though he gave his promise, he has done all these things, and he will not escape.”’
19 “‘Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “As surely as I am alive, I will bring upon his head the consequences of despising my oath and breaking my covenant.
20 I will cast my net over him, and he will be caught in my hunting net. I will bring him to Babylon and enter into judgment with him there because of the unfaithfulness he committed against me.
21 All the fugitives of his troops will fall by the sword, and those remaining will be scattered in every direction. Then you will have to know that I myself, Jehovah, have spoken.”’
22 “‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I will take a shoot from the top of the lofty cedar and plant it, from the top of its twigs I will pluck a tender shoot, and I myself will plant it on a high and lofty mountain.
23 On a high mountain of Israel I will plant it; and its branches will grow, and it will produce fruit and become a majestic cedar. And every kind of bird will live beneath it and reside in the shadow of its foliage.
24 And all the trees of the field will have to know that I myself, Jehovah, have brought down the high tree and exalted the low tree; I have dried up the green tree and made the dry tree blossom. I myself, Jehovah, have spoken and have done it.”’”
18 And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
2 “What does this proverb that you quote in the land of Israel mean, ‘Fathers have eaten sour grapes, but the teeth of the sons are set on edge’?
3 “‘As surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘you will not continue to quote this saying in Israel.
4 Look! All the souls—to me they belong. As the soul of the father so also the soul of the son—to me they belong. The soul who sins is the one who will die.
5 “‘Suppose that a man is righteous and does what is just and right.
6 He does not eat idolatrous sacrifices on the mountains; he does not look up to the disgusting idols of the house of Israel; he does not defile his neighbor’s wife or have relations with a woman who is menstruating;
7 he does not mistreat anyone, but he returns what a debtor has given him in pledge; he does not rob anyone, but he gives his own food to the hungry one and covers the naked one with a garment;
8 he does not charge interest or engage in usury, but he refrains from acting with injustice; he executes true justice between one man and another;
9 and he keeps walking in my statutes and observing my judicial decisions in order to act in faithfulness. Such a man is righteous and will surely keep living,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
10 “‘But suppose that he has become father to a son who is a robber or a murderer or who does any of these other things
11 (though the father has not done any of these things)—he eats idolatrous sacrifices on the mountains, defiles his neighbor’s wife,
12 mistreats the needy and the poor, takes things by robbery, does not return a pledge, looks up to the disgusting idols, engages in detestable practices,
13 engages in usury and charges interest—then the son will not keep living. Because of all these detestable things that he has done, he will surely be put to death. His own blood will be upon him.
14 “‘But suppose that a father has a son who sees all the sins his father has committed, and though he sees them, he does not do such things.
15 He does not eat idolatrous sacrifices on the mountains; he does not look up to the disgusting idols of the house of Israel; he does not defile his neighbor’s wife;
16 he does not mistreat anyone; he does not seize what was pledged; he does not take anything in robbery; he gives his own food to the hungry one and covers the naked one with a garment;
17 he refrains from oppressing the poor; he does not engage in usury or charge interest; and he carries out my judicial decisions and walks in my statutes. Such a man will not die because of the error of his father. He will surely keep living.
18 But because his father practiced fraud, robbed his brother, and did what was wrong among his people, he will die for his error.
19 “‘But you will say: “Why does the son not bear guilt because of his father’s error?” Since the son has done what is just and righteous, has kept all my statutes and has observed them, he will surely keep living.
20 The soul who sins is the one who will die. A son will bear no guilt because of the error of his father, and a father will bear no guilt because of the error of his son. The righteousness of the righteous one will be accounted to him alone, and the wickedness of the wicked one will be accounted to him alone.
21 “‘Now if someone wicked turns away from all the sins he has committed and keeps my statutes and does what is just and righteous, he will surely keep living. He will not die.
22 None of the transgressions that he has committed will be held against him. He will keep living for doing what is righteous.’
23 “‘Do I take any pleasure at all in the death of a wicked person?’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. ‘Do I not prefer that he turn away from his ways and keep living?’
24 “‘But when someone righteous abandons his righteousness and does what is wrong, doing all the detestable things the wicked do, will he live? None of the righteous acts that he did will be remembered. For his unfaithfulness and the sin he has committed, he will die.
25 “‘But you will say: “The way of Jehovah is unjust.” Please listen, O house of Israel! Is it my way that is unjust? Is it not your ways that are unjust?
26 “‘When someone righteous abandons his righteousness and does what is wrong and dies because of it, he will die for his own wrongdoing.
27 “‘And when someone wicked turns away from the wickedness that he has committed and begins to do what is just and righteous, he will preserve his own life.
28 When he realizes and turns away from all the transgressions that he has committed, he will surely keep living. He will not die.
29 “‘But the house of Israel will say: “The way of Jehovah is unjust.” Is it really my ways that are unjust, O house of Israel? Is it not your ways that are unjust?’
30 “‘Therefore, I will judge each one of you according to his ways, O house of Israel,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. ‘Turn away, yes, turn completely away from all your transgressions, so that they will not be a stumbling block bringing guilt upon you.
31 Rid yourselves of all the transgressions you have committed and acquire a new heart and a new spirit, for why should you die, O house of Israel?’
32 “‘I do not take any pleasure in the death of anyone,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. ‘So turn back and live.’”
19 “You must sing a dirge concerning the chieftains of Israel
2 and say, ‘What was your mother? A lioness among lions. She lay down among strong young lions and reared her cubs.
3 She raised one of her cubs, and he became a strong young lion. He learned how to tear prey apart, He even devoured humans.
4 Nations heard about him and caught him in their pit, And they brought him to the land of Egypt with hooks.
5 She waited and eventually saw that there was no hope for his return. So she took another of her cubs and sent him out as a strong young lion.
6 He also walked about among the lions and became a strong young lion. He learned how to tear prey apart, and he even devoured humans.
7 He prowled among their fortified towers and devastated their cities, So that the desolate land was filled with the sound of his roaring.
8 Nations from the surrounding districts came against him to cast their net over him, And he was caught in their pit.
9 With hooks they put him in a cage and brought him to the king of Babylon. There they confined him, so that his voice would no more be heard on the mountains of Israel.
10 Your mother was like a vine in your blood, planted by waters. It bore fruit and was full of branches because of the abundant water.
11 It developed strong branches, fit for the scepters of rulers. It grew and towered over the other trees, And it became visible because of its height and because of the abundance of its foliage.
12 But in fury she was uprooted and thrown to the earth, And an east wind dried up her fruit. Her strong branches were torn off and became dry, and fire consumed them.
13 Now she is planted in the wilderness, In a waterless, thirsty land.
14 The fire spread from her branches and consumed her shoots and her fruit, And there was no strong branch left, no scepter for ruling. “‘That is a dirge, and it will serve as a dirge.’”
20 Now in the seventh year, in the fifth month, on the tenth day of the month, some of the elders of Israel came and sat down before me to inquire of Jehovah.
2 Then the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
3 “Son of man, speak with the elders of Israel, and tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Are you coming to inquire of me? ‘As surely as I am alive, I will not respond to your inquiry,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”’
4 “Are you ready to judge them? Are you ready to judge them, son of man? Make them know the detestable things that their forefathers did.
5 Tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “In the day I chose Israel, I also swore to the offspring of the house of Jacob, and I made myself known to them in the land of Egypt. Yes, I swore to them and said, ‘I am Jehovah your God.’
6 In that day I swore that I would bring them out of the land of Egypt to a land that I had searched out for them, one flowing with milk and honey. It was the most beautiful of all the lands.
7 I then said to them, ‘Each of you must throw away the detestable things that are before your eyes; do not defile yourselves with the disgusting idols of Egypt. I am Jehovah your God.’
8 “‘“But they rebelled against me and were not willing to listen to me. They did not throw away the detestable things that were before them, and they would not abandon the disgusting idols of Egypt. So I promised to pour out my rage on them and to unleash my anger fully against them in the land of Egypt.
9 But I acted for the sake of my name so that it would not be profaned before the nations among whom they were living. For I made myself known to them before these nations when I brought them out of the land of Egypt.
10 So I brought them out of the land of Egypt and led them into the wilderness.
11 “‘“I then gave them my statutes and made my judicial decisions known to them, so that the man who follows them may have life by them.
12 I also gave my sabbaths to them as a sign between me and them, so that they would know that I, Jehovah, am the one sanctifying them.
13 “‘“But the house of Israel rebelled against me in the wilderness. They did not walk in my statutes, and they rejected my judicial decisions, which if a man follows them, he will have life by them. They utterly profaned my sabbaths. So I promised to pour out my fury on them in the wilderness to exterminate them.
14 I acted for the sake of my own name so that it would not be profaned before the nations, in whose sight I brought them out.
15 I also swore to them in the wilderness that I would not bring them into the land that I had given them—a land flowing with milk and honey, the most beautiful of all the lands—
16 because they rejected my judicial decisions, they did not walk in my statutes, and they profaned my sabbaths, for their heart was following after their disgusting idols.
17 “‘“But I felt sorry for them, and I did not destroy them; I did not exterminate them in the wilderness.
18 I said to their sons in the wilderness, ‘Do not walk in the regulations of your forefathers or keep their judgments or defile yourselves with their disgusting idols.
19 I am Jehovah your God. Walk in my statutes, and keep my judicial decisions, and carry them out.
20 And sanctify my sabbaths, and they will serve as a sign between me and you for you to know that I am Jehovah your God.’
21 “‘“But the sons began to rebel against me. They did not walk in my statutes, and they did not observe and carry out my judicial decisions, which if a man follows them, he will have life by them. My sabbaths they profaned. So I promised to pour out my rage on them and to unleash my anger against them fully in the wilderness.
22 But I refrained and acted for the sake of my own name, so that it should not be profaned before the nations, in whose sight I brought them out.
23 Also, I swore to them in the wilderness that I would scatter them among the nations and disperse them among the lands,
24 because they did not carry out my judicial decisions and they rejected my statutes, they profaned my sabbaths, and they followed after the disgusting idols of their forefathers.
25 I also allowed them to follow regulations that were not good and judicial decisions by which they could not have life.
26 I let them become defiled by their own sacrifices—when they made every firstborn child pass through the fire—in order to make them desolate, so that they would know that I am Jehovah.”’
27 “So speak to the house of Israel, O son of man, and tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “In this way also, your forefathers blasphemed me by acting unfaithfully against me.
28 I brought them into the land that I swore to give them. When they saw all the high hills and leafy trees, they began offering their sacrifices and their offensive offerings. They presented the pleasing aromas of their sacrifices and poured out their drink offerings there.
29 So I asked them, ‘What is the meaning of this high place to which you go? (It is still called High Place to this day.)’”’
30 “Now say to the house of Israel, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Are you defiling yourselves the same way your forefathers did by going after their disgusting idols to commit spiritual prostitution with them?
31 And are you still defiling yourselves to this day by offering sacrifices to all your disgusting idols, making your sons pass through the fire? Should I at the same time respond to your inquiry, O house of Israel?”’ “‘As surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘I will not respond to your inquiry.
32 And what you have in mind when you say, “Let us become like the nations, like the families of the other lands, who worship wood and stone,” it will never happen.’”
33 “‘As surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘I will rule as king over you with a mighty hand, with an outstretched arm, and with an outpouring of rage.
34 I will bring you out from the peoples and collect you together out of the lands where you have been scattered with a mighty hand, with an outstretched arm, and with an outpouring of rage.
35 I will bring you into the wilderness of the peoples and enter into judgment with you there face-to-face.
36 “‘Just as I entered into judgment with your forefathers in the wilderness of the land of Egypt, so I will enter into judgment with you,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
37 ‘I will make you pass under the shepherd’s staff and bring you under obligation to the covenant.
38 But I will remove from you the rebels and those transgressing against me. For I will bring them out of the land of their foreign residence, but they will not enter the land of Israel; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.’
39 “As for you, O house of Israel, this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Each of you go and serve his disgusting idols. But afterward if you do not listen to me, you will no longer be able to profane my holy name by your sacrifices and your disgusting idols.’
40 “‘For in my holy mountain, on a high mountain of Israel,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘is where the whole house of Israel, all of them, will serve me in the land. I will take pleasure in them there, and I will require your contributions and the firstfruits of your offerings, all your holy things.
41 Because of the pleasing aroma, I will take pleasure in you when I bring you out from the peoples and collect you together from the lands to which you have been scattered; and I will be sanctified among you before the eyes of the nations.’
42 “‘And you will have to know that I am Jehovah when I bring you to the land of Israel, into the land that I swore to give to your forefathers.
43 And there you will remember your conduct and all your deeds by which you defiled yourselves, and you will loathe yourselves because of all the bad things that you did.
44 Then you will have to know that I am Jehovah when I deal with you for the sake of my name, not according to your wicked conduct or according to your corrupted dealings, O house of Israel,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
45 And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
46 “Son of man, turn your face in the direction of the southern quarter and proclaim to the south, and prophesy to the forest of the field of the south.
47 Say to the forest of the south, ‘Hear the word of Jehovah. This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am setting a fire ablaze against you, and it will consume every green tree and every dry tree in you. The burning flame will not be extinguished, and every face will be scorched by it, from south to north.
48 And all flesh will see that I myself, Jehovah, have set it afire, so that it will not be extinguished.”’”
49 And I said: “Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah! They are saying about me, ‘Is he not just speaking in riddles?’”
21 The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
2 “Son of man, turn your face toward Jerusalem, and make a proclamation against the holy places, and prophesy against the land of Israel.
3 Say to the land of Israel, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Here I am against you, and I will bring my sword out of its sheath and cut off from you both the righteous and the wicked.
4 Because I will cut off from you the righteous and the wicked, my sword will be drawn from its sheath against all flesh, from south to north.
5 All people will have to know that I myself, Jehovah, have drawn my sword from its sheath. It will not go back again.”’
6 “And you, son of man, sigh while you tremble, yes, sigh bitterly before them.
7 And if they say to you, ‘Why are you sighing?’ you will say, ‘Because of a report.’ For it will certainly come, and every heart will melt with fear and every hand will hang limp and every spirit will become dejected and every knee will drip with water. ‘Look! It will certainly come—it will take place,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
8 The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
9 “Son of man, prophesy and say, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Say, ‘A sword! A sword is sharpened, and it is polished.
10 It is sharpened to inflict a great slaughter; it is polished to flash like lightning.’”’” “Should we not rejoice?” “‘Will it reject the scepter of my own son, as it does every tree?
11 “‘It is given to be polished and to be wielded with the hand. This sword is sharpened and polished, to be put into the hand of an executioner.
12 “‘Cry out and wail, son of man, for it has come against my people; it is against all the chieftains of Israel. These will be victims of the sword along with my people. So strike your thigh in grief.
13 For an examination has been made, and what will happen if the sword rejects the scepter? It will cease to exist,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
14 “And you, son of man, prophesy and clap your hands and repeat ‘A sword!’ three times. It is the sword of the slain victims, the sword of great slaughter, that surrounds them.
15 Their hearts will melt with fear and many will fall at their city gates; I will inflict a slaughter by the sword. Yes, it flashes like lightning and is polished for a slaughter!
16 Cut sharply to the right! Swing to the left! Go wherever your blade is directed!
17 I will also clap my hands and satisfy my rage. I myself, Jehovah, have spoken.”
18 And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
19 “As for you, son of man, mark out two ways for the sword of the king of Babylon to come. Both of them will originate from the same land, and a signpost should be set up where the road branches off to the two cities.
20 You should mark out one way for the sword to come against Rabʹbah of the Amʹmon·ites, and the other way against fortified Jerusalem in Judah.
21 For the king of Babylon stops to use divination at the fork in the road, where the two roads branch off. He shakes the arrows. He consults his idols; he examines the liver.
22 The divination in his right hand is pointed toward Jerusalem, to set up battering rams, to give the word for slaughter, to sound the battle cry, to set battering rams against the gates, to throw up a siege rampart, to build a siege wall.
23 But it will seem like false divination in the eyes of those who had sworn oaths to them. But he remembers their guilt and will capture them.
24 “Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘You have caused your own guilt to be remembered by exposing your transgressions and causing your sins to be seen in all your actions. Now that you have been remembered, you will be taken by force.’
25 “But your day has come, O fatally wounded, wicked chieftain of Israel, the time of your final punishment.
26 This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Remove the turban, and take off the crown. This will not remain the same. Raise up the low one, and bring low the high one.
27 A ruin, a ruin, a ruin I will make it. And it will not belong to anyone until the one who has the legal right comes, and I will give it to him.’
28 “And you, son of man, prophesy and say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says about the Amʹmon·ites and about their insults.’ Say, ‘A sword! A sword is drawn for a slaughter; it is polished to devour and to flash like lightning.
29 Despite the false visions and lying divination about you, you will be piled up on the slain, the wicked men whose day has come, the time of their final punishment.
30 Return it to its sheath. I will judge you in the place that you were created, in the land of your origin.
31 I will pour out my indignation on you. I will blow upon you with the fire of my fury, and I will hand you over to brutal men, the craftsmen of destruction.
32 You will become fuel for the fire; your own blood will be shed in the land, and you will be remembered no more, for I myself, Jehovah, have spoken.’”
22 And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
2 “As for you, son of man, are you prepared to pronounce judgment on the bloodguilty city and to make known to her all her detestable things?
3 You are to say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “O city that sheds blood within herself, whose time is coming, who makes disgusting idols to defile herself,
4 your bloodshed has made you guilty, and your disgusting idols have made you unclean. You have hastened the end of your days, and the end of your years has come. That is why I will make you an object of reproach to the nations and an object of mockery to all the lands.
5 The lands nearby and those far away from you will mock you, you whose name is unclean and who are filled with turmoil.
6 Look! Each of the chieftains of Israel among you uses his authority to shed blood.
7 Within you they treat their father and mother with contempt. They defraud the foreign resident, and they mistreat the fatherless child and the widow.”’”
8 “‘My holy places you despise, and my sabbaths you profane.
9 Within you are slanderers intent on shedding blood. Within you they eat sacrifices on the mountains and carry on obscene conduct in your midst.
10 Within you they dishonor their father’s bed, and they violate a woman unclean in her menstruation.
11 Within you one man acts detestably with his neighbor’s wife, another defiles his own daughter-in-law with obscene conduct, and another violates his sister, the daughter of his own father.
12 Within you they take a bribe to shed blood. You lend on interest or for a profit, and you extort money from your neighbors. Yes, you have entirely forgotten me,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
13 “‘Look! I clap my hands in disgust at the dishonest gain you have made and over the acts of bloodshed in your midst.
14 Will your courage endure and your hands remain strong in the days when I take action against you? I myself, Jehovah, have spoken, and I will take action.
15 I will scatter you among the nations and disperse you among the lands, and I will put an end to your uncleanness.
16 And you will be dishonored before the nations, and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.’”
17 And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
18 “Son of man, the house of Israel has become like worthless dross to me. All of them are copper and tin and iron and lead in a furnace. They have become the dross of silver.
19 “Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because all of you have become like worthless dross, I am collecting you together inside Jerusalem.
20 Just as silver and copper and iron and lead and tin are collected inside a furnace in order to blow fire upon them and melt them, so I will collect you together in my anger and in my rage, and I will blow upon you and make you melt.
21 I will bring you together and blow upon you with the fire of my fury, and you will be melted inside of her.
22 Just as silver is melted in a furnace, so you will be melted inside her; and you will have to know that I myself, Jehovah, have poured out my rage on you.’”
23 And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
24 “Son of man, say to her, ‘You are a land that will not be cleansed or rained on in the day of indignation.
25 Her prophets have conspired within her, like a roaring lion tearing prey. They are devouring people. They are seizing treasure and precious things. They have made many widows within her.
26 Her priests have violated my law, and they keep profaning my holy places. They make no distinction between what is holy and what is common, and they fail to make known what is unclean and what is clean, and they refuse to observe my sabbaths, and I am profaned among them.
27 Her princes in her midst are like wolves tearing prey; they shed blood and kill people to make dishonest gain.
28 But her prophets have plastered over their deeds with whitewash. They see false visions and give lying divination, and they say: “This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says,” when Jehovah himself has not spoken.
29 The people of the land have defrauded and committed robbery, they have mistreated the needy and the poor, and they have defrauded the foreign resident and denied him justice.’
30 “‘I was looking for a man from among them who would repair the stone wall or stand before me in the breach in behalf of the land, so that it would not be destroyed, but I found no one.
31 So I will pour out my indignation on them and exterminate them with the fire of my fury. I will bring the consequences of their way on their own head,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
23 The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
2 “Son of man, there were two women who were the daughters of the same mother.
3 They became prostitutes in Egypt; from their youth they engaged in prostitution. Their breasts were squeezed there, and their virgin bosoms were fondled.
4 Their names were O·hoʹlah, the older one, and her sister O·holʹi·bah. They became mine and gave birth to sons and daughters. As for their names, O·hoʹlah is Sa·marʹi·a, and O·holʹi·bah is Jerusalem.
5 “O·hoʹlah began to prostitute herself while she belonged to me. She lusted after her passionate lovers, her neighbors the As·syrʹi·ans.
6 They were governors clothed in blue and deputy rulers—all desirable young men mounted on their horses.
7 She continued to prostitute herself with all the choicest sons of As·syrʹi·a, and she defiled herself with the disgusting idols of those she lusted after.
8 She did not abandon the prostitution she practiced in Egypt, for in her youth they had lain down with her, and they fondled her virgin bosom and poured out their lust on her.
9 So I gave her into the hand of her passionate lovers, the sons of As·syrʹi·a, after whom she had lusted.
10 They exposed her nakedness and seized her sons and daughters, and they killed her with a sword. She became notorious among women, and they executed judgment against her.
11 “When her sister O·holʹi·bah saw it, her lust became even more depraved, and her prostitution was worse than that of her sister.
12 She lusted after her neighbors the sons of As·syrʹi·a, the governors and deputy rulers who were clothed in splendor and mounted on horses—all desirable young men.
13 When she defiled herself, I saw that both of them had followed the same course.
14 But she kept adding to her acts of prostitution. She saw men carved on the wall, images of Chal·deʹans carved in vermilion,
15 wearing belts around their waist, with flowing turbans on their heads, having the appearance of warriors, all of them depicting Babylonians, born in the land of the Chal·deʹans.
16 She began to lust after them as soon as she saw them, and she sent messengers to them in Chal·deʹa.
17 So the sons of Babylon kept coming to her bed of lovemaking, and they defiled her with their lust. After she was defiled by them, she turned away from them in disgust.
18 “When she went on brazenly engaging in prostitution and exposing her nakedness, I turned away from her in disgust, just as I had turned away from her sister in disgust.
19 And she kept increasing her acts of prostitution, calling to mind the days of her youth when she prostituted herself in the land of Egypt.
20 She lusted after them like the concubines of men whose male members are like those of a donkey and whose genitals are like those of a horse.
21 You yearned for the obscene conduct of your youth in Egypt when they fondled your bosom, the breasts of your youth.
22 “Therefore, O·holʹi·bah, this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Here I am stirring up your lovers whom you turned away from in disgust, and I will bring them against you from every direction,
23 the sons of Babylon and all the Chal·deʹans, the men of Peʹkod and Shoʹa and Koʹa, along with all the sons of As·syrʹi·a. All of them are desirable young men, governors and deputy rulers, warriors and handpicked, all mounted on horses.
24 They will attack you with rumbling war chariots and wheels and with a great assembly of troops, with large shield and buckler and helmet. They will take up positions all around you, and I will authorize them to pass judgment, and they will judge you as they see fit.
25 I will express my indignation against you, and they will deal with you in their rage. They will cut off your nose and your ears, and those of you who remain will fall by the sword. They will take away your sons and your daughters, and those of you who remain will be consumed by fire.
26 They will strip off your garments and seize your beautiful jewelry.
27 I will put an end to your obscene conduct and your prostitution, which started in the land of Egypt. You will stop looking at them, and you will remember Egypt no more.’
28 “For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Here I am about to hand you over to those you hate, those you turned away from in disgust.
29 They will deal with you in hatred and take away all you have toiled for and leave you naked and exposed. The shameful nakedness of your immorality and your obscene conduct and your prostitution will be exposed.
30 These things will be done to you because you chased after the nations like a prostitute, because you defiled yourself with their disgusting idols.
31 You have followed the same course as your sister, and I will put her cup into your hand.’
32 “This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘You will drink the deep and wide cup of your sister, And you will become an object of laughter and ridicule, of which the cup contains much.
33 You will be overcome by drunkenness and grief, A cup of horror and desolation, The cup of your sister, Sa·marʹi·a.
34 You will have to drink it and drain it dry and gnaw on its earthenware fragments And then tear out your breasts. “For I myself have spoken,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.’
35 “Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because you have forgotten me and have completely disregarded me, you will bear the consequences of your obscene conduct and your acts of prostitution.’”
36 Jehovah then said to me: “Son of man, will you pronounce judgment on O·hoʹlah and O·holʹi·bah and confront them with their disgusting practices?
37 They have committed adultery, and there is blood on their hands. Not only have they committed adultery with their disgusting idols, but they have also made their sons whom they bore to me pass through the fire as food for their idols.
38 Moreover, this is what they have done to me: They defiled my sanctuary on that day, and they profaned my sabbaths.
39 After they slaughtered their sons as sacrifices to their disgusting idols, they came into my sanctuary to profane it on that very day. That is what they did inside my own house.
40 They even sent a messenger for men to come from far away. When they were coming, you washed yourself and painted your eyes and adorned yourself with ornaments.
41 And you sat down on a magnificent couch with a table set in front of it, on which you put my incense and my oil.
42 The sound of a carefree crowd of men was heard there, among whom were drunkards brought in from the wilderness. They put bracelets on the hands of the women and beautiful crowns on their heads.
43 “Then I said regarding her who was worn out with adultery: ‘Now she will keep committing her prostitution.’
44 So they kept going in to her, just as one goes to a prostitute. That is how they went in to O·hoʹlah and to O·holʹi·bah, the women of obscene conduct.
45 But righteous men will render to her the appropriate judgment for adultery and bloodshed; for adulteresses is what they are, and they have blood on their hands.
46 “For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘An army will be brought against them to make them an object of horror and something to plunder.
47 The army will hurl stones at them and cut them down with their swords. They will kill their sons and daughters and burn their houses with fire.
48 I will put an end to the obscene conduct in the land, and all the women will learn a lesson and not copy your obscene conduct.
49 They will bring on you the consequences of your obscene conduct and of your sins with your disgusting idols; and you will have to know that I am the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.’”
24 The word of Jehovah again came to me in the ninth year, in the tenth month, on the tenth day of the month, saying:
2 “Son of man, record this date, this very day. The king of Babylon has begun his attack against Jerusalem on this very day.
3 And relate a proverb concerning the rebellious house, and say concerning them: “‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Put the cooking pot on; put it on the fire and pour water into it.
4 Put pieces of meat into it, every good piece, The thigh and the shoulder; fill it with the choicest bones.
5 Take the choicest sheep of the flock, and stack the logs all around under the pot. Boil the pieces, and cook the bones inside it.”’
6 “Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Woe to the city of bloodshed, the rusty cooking pot, whose rust has not been removed! Empty it piece by piece; do not cast lots for them.
7 For its blood is within it; she poured it out on the bare rock. She did not pour it out on the earth, to cover it over with dust.
8 To stir up rage for executing vengeance, I have put her blood on the shining, bare rock So that it may not be covered over.’
9 “Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Woe to the city of bloodshed! I will pile the wood high.
10 Heap on the logs and kindle the fire, Boil the flesh thoroughly, pour out the broth, and let the bones be charred.
11 Set the empty pot on the coals to make it hot So that its copper will become red hot. Its uncleanness will melt away within it, and its rust will be consumed.
12 It is frustrating and exhausting, For the heavy rust will not come off. Throw it into the fire with its rust!’
13 “‘Your uncleanness was due to your obscene conduct. I tried to cleanse you, but you would not become clean from your uncleanness. You will not become clean until my rage against you subsides.
14 I myself, Jehovah, have spoken. It will come to pass. I will act without holding back, without sorrow, without regret. They will judge you according to your ways and your dealings,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
15 And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
16 “Son of man, in a single blow I am about to take away your dear one from you. You should not mourn; nor should you weep or shed tears.
17 Groan in silence, and do not observe mourning rites for the dead. Bind on your turban, and put on your sandals. You should not cover over the mustache, and do not eat the bread brought to you by others.”
18 And I spoke to the people in the morning, and my wife died in the evening. So I did in the morning just as I had been commanded.
19 The people were saying to me: “Will you not tell us what these things you are doing have to do with us?”
20 I replied to them: “The word of Jehovah has come to me, saying,
21 ‘Tell the house of Israel: “This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says, ‘I am about to profane my sanctuary, the source of your great pride, the thing dear to you and the desire of your heart. Your own sons and daughters whom you left behind will fall by the sword.
22 Then you will have to do just as I have done. You will not cover over your mustache, and you will not eat the bread brought to you by others.
23 Your turbans will be on your heads and your sandals on your feet. You will not mourn or weep. Instead, you will rot away in your errors, and you will groan to one another.
24 Ezekiel has become a sign for you. Just as he has done, you will do. When it happens, you will have to know that I am the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.’”’”
25 “And as for you, son of man, on the day that I take away from them their fortress—the beautiful object of their joy, the thing dear to them, their heart’s desire—along with their sons and daughters,
26 it will be reported to you by one who has escaped.
27 In that day you will open your mouth and speak to the one who escaped, and you will no longer be mute. You will become a sign to them, and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.”
25 The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
2 “Son of man, turn your face toward the Amʹmon·ites, and prophesy against them.
3 You must say concerning the Amʹmon·ites, ‘Hear the word of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Because you said ‘Aha!’ against my sanctuary when it was profaned, and against the land of Israel when it was laid desolate, and against the house of Judah when they went into exile,
4 therefore I am giving you to the people of the East as a possession. They will set up their encampments within you and pitch their tents among you. They will eat your fruitage, and they will drink your milk.
5 I will make Rabʹbah a pasture ground for camels, and the land of the Amʹmon·ites a resting-place for the flock; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.”’”
6 “For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because you clapped your hands and stamped your feet and you rejoiced over the land of Israel with such utter scorn,
7 therefore I will stretch out my hand against you to give you to the nations as something to plunder. I will cut you off from the peoples and destroy you from the lands. I will annihilate you, and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.’
8 “This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because Moʹab and Seʹir have said, “Look! The house of Judah is like all the other nations,”
9 I am exposing Moʹab’s flank at his frontier cities, the beauty of his land, Beth-jeshʹi·moth, Baʹal-meʹon, and clear to Kir·i·a·thaʹim.
10 I will give it along with the Amʹmon·ites as a possession to the people of the East, so that the Amʹmon·ites will not be remembered among the nations.
11 And I will execute judgment in Moʹab, and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’
12 “This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Eʹdom has acted vengefully against the house of Judah and has incurred great guilt in taking revenge on them;
13 therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I will also stretch out my hand against Eʹdom and cut off from it both man and livestock, and I will make it desolate. From Teʹman clear to Deʹdan, they will fall by the sword.
14 ‘I will take vengeance on Eʹdom by the hand of my people Israel. They will bring my anger and my wrath on Eʹdom, so that they experience my own vengeance,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”’
15 “This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because of their unrelenting hostility, the Phi·lisʹtines have maliciously sought to bring vengeance and destruction.
16 Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am stretching out my hand against the Phi·lisʹtines, and I will cut off the Cherʹe·thites and will destroy the remaining inhabitants of the seacoast.
17 I will execute on them great acts of vengeance with furious punishments, and they will have to know that I am Jehovah when I bring my vengeance on them.”’”
26 In the 11th year, on the first day of the month, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
2 “Son of man, because Tyre has said against Jerusalem, ‘Aha! The gateway of the peoples has been broken! Everything will come my way, and I will become rich now that she is devastated’;
3 therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Here I am against you, O Tyre, and I will bring up many nations against you, just as the sea brings up its waves.
4 They will destroy the walls of Tyre and tear down her towers, and I will scrape away soil and make her a shining, bare rock.
5 She will become a drying yard for dragnets in the midst of the sea.’ “‘For I myself have spoken,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘and she will become plunder for the nations.
6 And her settlements in the countryside will be slaughtered by the sword, and people will have to know that I am Jehovah.’
7 “For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Here I am bringing King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon against Tyre from the north; he is a king of kings, with horses, war chariots, cavalrymen, and an army of many soldiers.
8 He will destroy your settlements in the countryside with the sword, and he will build a siege wall and throw up a siege rampart against you and raise up a great shield against you.
9 He will pound your walls with his battering ram, and with his axes he will pull down your towers.
10 His horses will be so many that they will cover you with dust, and the sound of the cavalry, the wheels, and the chariots will cause your walls to shake when he enters your gates, like men storming a city with broken walls.
11 The hooves of his horses will trample down all your streets; he will kill your people with the sword, and your mighty pillars will crash to the ground.
12 They will loot your resources, plunder your merchandise, tear down your walls, and pull down your fine houses; then they will throw your stones and your woodwork and your soil into the water.’
13 “‘I will put an end to the noise of your songs, and the sound of your harps will be heard no more.
14 And I will make you a shining, bare rock, and you will become a drying yard for dragnets. You will never be rebuilt, for I myself, Jehovah, have spoken,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
15 “This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says to Tyre: ‘At the sound of your downfall, when the dying ones are groaning, when a slaughter takes place in your midst, will the islands not shudder?
16 All the princes of the sea will come down from their thrones and remove their robes and strip off their embroidered garments, and they will be seized with trembling. They will sit on the ground and tremble constantly and stare at you in amazement.
17 And they will sing a dirge over you and say to you: “How you have perished, you who were inhabited from the seas, the praised city; You and your inhabitants were mighty on the sea, Spreading terror to all the inhabitants of the earth!
18 The islands will tremble on the day of your downfall, The islands of the sea will be disturbed when you are gone.”’
19 “For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘When I devastate you like the cities that are not inhabited, when I overwhelm you with the surging waters and the mighty waters have covered you,
20 I will bring you and those going down into the pit with you to the people of long ago; I will cause you to dwell in the lowest place, like the places of old that have been devastated, together with those going down into the pit, so that you may not be inhabited. Then I will glorify the land of the living.
21 “‘I will bring sudden terror upon you, and you will no longer be. They will search for you, but you will never again be found,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
27 The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
2 “As for you, son of man, sing a dirge over Tyre,
3 and say to Tyre, ‘You who dwell at the gateways of the sea, The merchant for the peoples of many islands, This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “O Tyre, you yourself have said, ‘I am perfect in beauty.’
4 Your territories are in the heart of the sea, And your builders have perfected your beauty.
5 They made all your planks from the juniper trees of Seʹnir, And they took a cedar from Lebʹa·non to make a mast for you.
6 They made your oars from oaks of Baʹshan, And your prow was of cypress inlaid with ivory from the islands of Kitʹtim.
7 Colorful linen from Egypt served as cloth for your sail, And your deck awnings were of blue thread and purple wool from the islands of E·liʹshah.
8 The inhabitants of Siʹdon and of Arʹvad were your rowers. Your own skilled men, O Tyre, were your sailors.
9 The experienced and skilled men of Geʹbal caulked your seams. All the ships of the sea and their mariners came to you to trade merchandise.
10 Men of Persia, Lud, and Put were in your army, your men of war. They hung their shields and helmets in you, and they brought you splendor.
11 The men of Arʹvad in your army were stationed on your walls all around, And brave men manned your towers. They hung circular shields all around your walls And perfected your beauty.
12 “‘“Tarʹshish did business with you because of your abundant wealth. They exchanged silver, iron, tin, and lead for your goods.
13 Jaʹvan, Tuʹbal, and Meʹshech traded with you, exchanging slaves and articles of copper for your merchandise.
14 The house of To·garʹmah exchanged horses and steeds and mules for your goods.
15 The people of Deʹdan traded with you; you employed merchants on many islands; they gave ivory tusks and ebony as your tribute.
16 Eʹdom did business with you because of the abundance of your products. They gave turquoise, purple wool, colorful embroidery, fine fabric, corals, and rubies in exchange for your goods.
17 “‘“Judah and the land of Israel traded with you, giving the wheat of Minʹnith, choice foods, honey, oil, and balsam in exchange for your goods.
18 “‘“Damascus did business with you because of the abundance of your products and all your wealth, trading the wine of Helʹbon and wool of Zaʹhar.
19 Veʹdan and Jaʹvan from Uʹzal gave wrought iron, cassia, and cane in exchange for your goods.
20 Deʹdan traded with you in saddlecloths for riding.
21 You employed the Arabs and all the chieftains of Keʹdar, who were merchants of lambs and rams and goats.
22 The merchants of Sheʹba and Raʹa·mah traded with you; they gave all sorts of the finest perfumes, precious stones, and gold in exchange for your goods.
23 Haʹran, Canʹneh, Eʹden, the merchants of Sheʹba, Asʹshur, and Chilʹmad traded with you.
24 In your marketplace they traded beautiful garments, cloaks made of blue material and colorful embroidery, and multicolored carpets, all bound and secured with ropes.
25 The ships of Tarʹshish were the caravans for your merchandise, So that you were filled and loaded down in the heart of the open sea.
26 Your rowers have brought you into heavy seas; The east wind has wrecked you in the heart of the open sea.
27 Your wealth, your goods, your merchandise, your mariners, and your sailors, Those caulking your seams, those trading your merchandise, and all the men of war —The entire multitude within you— They will all sink in the heart of the open sea on the day of your downfall.
28 When your sailors cry out, the coastlands will shudder.
29 All the oarsmen, the mariners, and the seamen Will come down from their ships and stand on the land.
30 They will raise their voices and cry out bitterly over you As they throw dust on their heads and wallow in ashes.
31 They will make themselves bald and put on sackcloth; They will weep bitterly over you with intense wailing.
32 In their lamentation they will sing a dirge and chant over you: ‘Who is like Tyre, now silent in the midst of the sea?
33 When your goods came in from the open sea, you satisfied many peoples. Your abundant wealth and your merchandise enriched earth’s kings.
34 Now you have been wrecked in the open sea, in the deep waters, And all your merchandise and your people have sunk with you.
35 All the inhabitants of the islands will stare at you in amazement, And their kings will shudder with horror—their faces will be troubled.
36 The merchants among the nations will whistle over what happened to you. Your end will be sudden and terrible, And you will cease to exist for all time.’”’”
28 The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
2 “Son of man, tell the leader of Tyre, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Because your heart has become haughty, you keep saying, ‘I am a god. I sit on the throne of a god in the heart of the sea.’ But you are only a man, not a god, Though in your heart you feel that you are a god.
3 Look! You are wiser than Daniel. No secrets have been hidden from you.
4 You have made yourself wealthy by your wisdom and your discernment, And you keep storing up gold and silver in your treasuries.
5 Your skillful trading brought you great wealth, And your heart grew haughty because of your wealth.”’
6 “‘Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Because in your heart you feel that you are a god,
7 I am bringing foreigners against you, the most ruthless of the nations, And they will draw their swords against the beauty of your wisdom And defile your glorious splendor.
8 They will bring you down to the pit, And you will die a violent death in the heart of the open sea.
9 Will you still say, ‘I am a god,’ to the one killing you? You will be a mere man, not a god, in the hand of those defiling you.”’
10 ‘By the hand of foreigners, you will die the death of the uncircumcised ones, For I myself have spoken,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
11 And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
12 “Son of man, sing a dirge concerning the king of Tyre, and tell him, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “You were the model of perfection, Full of wisdom and perfect in beauty.
13 You were in Eʹden, the garden of God. You were adorned with every precious stone —Ruby, topaz, and jasper; chrysʹo·lite, onyx, and jade; sapphire, turquoise, and emerald; And their settings and mountings were made of gold. They were prepared on the day you were created.
14 I assigned you as the anointed covering cherub. You were on the holy mountain of God, and you walked about among fiery stones.
15 You were faultless in your ways from the day you were created Until unrighteousness was found in you.
16 Because of your abundant trade, You became filled with violence, and you began to sin. So I will cast you out as profane from the mountain of God and destroy you, O covering cherub, away from the stones of fire.
17 Your heart became haughty because of your beauty. You corrupted your wisdom because of your own glorious splendor. I will throw you down to the earth. I will make you a spectacle before kings.
18 Because of your great guilt and your dishonest trading, you have profaned your sanctuaries. I will cause a fire to break out in your midst, and it will consume you. I will reduce you to ashes on the earth before all those looking at you.
19 All who knew you among the peoples will stare at you in amazement. Your end will be sudden and terrible, And you will cease to exist for all time.”’”
20 And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
21 “Son of man, turn your face toward Siʹdon, and prophesy against her.
22 You should say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am against you, O Siʹdon, and I will be glorified in your midst; And people will have to know that I am Jehovah when I execute judgment on her and I am sanctified in her.
23 I will send pestilence into her and blood will flow in her streets. The slain will fall in her midst when the sword comes against her from all sides; And they will have to know that I am Jehovah.
24 “‘“Then the house of Israel will no longer be surrounded by injurious briars and painful thorns, those who treat them with scorn; and people will have to know that I am the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”’
25 “‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “When I regather the house of Israel from among the peoples where they were scattered, I will be sanctified among them in the eyes of the nations. And they will dwell on their land that I gave to my servant Jacob.
26 They will dwell on it in security and build houses and plant vineyards, and they will dwell in security when I execute judgment on all those around them who treat them with scorn; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah their God.”’”
30 And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
2 “Son of man, prophesy and say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Wail, ‘Alas, the day is coming!’
3 For the day is near, yes, a day of Jehovah is near. It will be a day of clouds, an appointed time of nations.
4 A sword will come against Egypt, and panic will overtake E·thi·oʹpi·a when the slain fall in Egypt; Its wealth is taken and its foundations are torn down.
5 E·thi·oʹpi·a, Put, Lud, and all the mixed populations, And Chub, along with the sons of the land of the covenant, By the sword they will all fall.”’
6 This is what Jehovah says: ‘The supporters of Egypt will also fall, And its arrogant power will be brought down.’ “‘From Migʹdol to Sy·eʹne they will fall by the sword in the land,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
7 ‘They will be made the most desolate of lands, and its own cities will become the most devastated cities.
8 And they will have to know that I am Jehovah when I set a fire in Egypt and all its allies are crushed.
9 In that day I will send messengers in ships to make self-confident E·thi·oʹpi·a tremble; panic will seize them in the day that is coming upon Egypt, for it will surely come.’
10 “This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘I will bring an end to Egypt’s hordes by the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon.
11 He and his troops, the most ruthless of the nations, will be brought in to destroy the land. They will draw their swords against Egypt and fill the land with the slain.
12 I will turn the canals of the Nile into dry ground and will sell the land into the hand of wicked men. I will make the land and everything in it desolate by the hand of foreigners. I myself, Jehovah, have spoken.’
13 “This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘I will also destroy the disgusting idols and bring an end to the worthless gods of Noph. There will no longer be a prince from the land of Egypt, and I will put fear in the land of Egypt.
14 I will desolate Pathʹros and set a fire in Zoʹan and execute judgment on No.
15 I will pour out my rage on Sin, the stronghold of Egypt, and destroy the population of No.
16 I will set a fire in Egypt; and Sin will be seized with terror and No will be broken through and Noph will face attack in broad daylight!
17 The young men of On and Pi·beʹseth will fall by the sword, and the cities will go into captivity.
18 In Te·haphʹne·hes the day will grow dark when I break the yoke bars of Egypt there. Her arrogant power will come to an end, clouds will cover her, and her towns will go into captivity.
19 I will execute judgment on Egypt, and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’”
20 And in the 11th year, in the first month, on the seventh day of the month, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
21 “Son of man, I have broken the arm of Pharʹaoh king of Egypt; it will not be bound up to be healed or wrapped with a bandage to make it strong enough to take up the sword.”
22 “Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Here I am against Pharʹaoh king of Egypt, and I will break his arms, the strong one and the broken one, and I will make the sword fall from his hand.
23 Then I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations and disperse them among the lands.
24 I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon and put my sword into his hand, and I will break the arms of Pharʹaoh, and he will groan loudly like a dying man before him.
25 I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, but the arms of Pharʹaoh will fall limp; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah when I put my sword into the hand of the king of Babylon and he wields it against the land of Egypt.
26 And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations and disperse them among the lands, and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’”
31 In the 11th year, in the third month, on the first day of the month, the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
2 “Son of man, say to Pharʹaoh king of Egypt and to his hordes, ‘Whom are you like in your greatness?
3 There was an As·syrʹi·an, a cedar in Lebʹa·non, With beautiful branches like a shady thicket, lofty in stature; Its top was among the clouds.
4 The waters made it grow big, the deep springs of water caused it to grow high. Streams were all around where it was planted; Their channels watered all the trees of the field.
5 That is why it grew taller than all the other trees of the field. Its boughs multiplied, and its branches grew long Because of the abundant water in its streams.
6 All the birds of the sky nested in its boughs, All the wild animals of the field gave birth under its branches, And all the populous nations were dwelling in its shade.
7 It became majestic in beauty and in the length of its branches, For its roots went down into abundant waters.
8 No other cedars in the garden of God could compare to it. None of the juniper trees had boughs like it, And none of the plane trees could match its branches. No other tree in the garden of God could rival its beauty.
9 I made it beautiful, with abundant foliage, And all the other trees of Eʹden, the garden of the true God, envied it.’
10 “Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because it became so tall, lifting its top among the clouds, and its heart became arrogant because of its height,
11 I will hand it over to the mighty ruler of the nations. He will surely act against it, and I will reject it for its wickedness.
12 And foreigners, the most ruthless of the nations, will cut it down, and they will abandon it on the mountains, and its foliage will fall in all the valleys, and its branches will lie broken in all the streams of the land. All the peoples of the earth will depart from its shade and abandon it.
13 All the birds of the sky will live on its fallen trunk, and all the wild animals of the field on its branches.
14 This is so that no tree near the waters should grow so tall or lift up its top among the clouds and that no well-watered tree may reach up to them in height. For they will all be given over to death, to the land down below, along with the sons of mankind, who are going down into the pit.’
15 “This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘On the day it goes down to the Grave, I will cause a mourning. Therefore, I will cover over the deep waters and hold back its streams so that the abundant waters are restrained. I will darken Lebʹa·non because of it, and the trees of the field will all wither away.
16 At the sound of its downfall, I will cause nations to shudder when I bring it down to the Grave along with all those going down into the pit, and all the trees of Eʹden, the choicest and the best of Lebʹa·non, all that are well-watered, will be comforted in the land down below.
17 They have gone down to the Grave with him, to those slain by the sword, together with his supporters who lived in his shadow among the nations.’
18 “‘Which of the trees of Eʹden was like you in glory and greatness? But you will certainly be brought down with the trees of Eʹden to the land down below. You will lie down among the uncircumcised ones, with those slain by the sword. This will happen to Pharʹaoh and all his hordes,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
32 And in the 12th year, in the 12th month, on the first day of the month, the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
2 “Son of man, sing a dirge concerning Pharʹaoh king of Egypt, and say to him, ‘You were like a strong young lion of the nations, But you have been silenced. You were like a sea monster, thrashing about in your rivers, Muddying the waters with your feet and fouling the rivers.’
3 This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘By means of an assembly of many nations I will cast my net over you, And they will haul you up in my dragnet.
4 I will abandon you on the land; I will cast you onto the open field. I will cause all the birds of the sky to settle on you, And I will satisfy the wild beasts of the whole earth with you.
5 I will cast your flesh on the mountains And fill the valleys with your remains.
6 I will drench the land with your gushing blood up to the mountains, And it will fill the streams.’
7 ‘And when you are extinguished I will cover the heavens and darken their stars. I will cover the sun with clouds, And the moon will not give its light.
8 I will darken all the shining luminaries in the heavens because of you, And I will cover your land with darkness,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
9 ‘I will distress the hearts of many peoples when I lead your captives to other nations, To lands that you have not known.
10 I will cause many peoples to be awestruck, And their kings will shudder in horror over you when I brandish my sword before them. They will tremble continually, each fearing for his life, On the day of your downfall.’
11 For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘The sword of the king of Babylon will come upon you.
12 I will cause your hordes to fall by the swords of mighty warriors, The most ruthless of the nations, all of them. They will bring down the pride of Egypt, and all her hordes will be annihilated.
13 I will destroy all her livestock beside her abundant waters, And no foot of a human or hoof of the livestock will muddy them again.’
14 ‘At that time I will clear up their waters, And I will make their rivers flow like oil,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
15 ‘When I make Egypt a desolate wasteland, a land stripped of all that filled it, When I strike down all the inhabitants in it, They will have to know that I am Jehovah.
16 This is a dirge, and people will certainly chant it; The daughters of the nations will chant it. They will chant it over Egypt and over all its hordes,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
17 Then in the 12th year, on the 15th day of the month, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
18 “Son of man, wail over the hordes of Egypt and bring her down to the land below, her and the daughters of mighty nations, with those going down into the pit.
19 “‘Whom do you surpass in beauty? Go down, and lie with the uncircumcised ones!’
20 “‘They will fall among those slain by the sword. She has been given to the sword; drag her away along with all her hordes.
21 “‘From the depths of the Grave the mightiest warriors will speak to him and his helpers. They will certainly go down and will lie just like the uncircumcised, slain by the sword.
22 As·syrʹi·a is there with all her assembly. Their graves are all around him, all of them fallen by the sword.
23 Her graves are in the depths of the pit, and her assembly is all around her grave, all of them struck down by the sword, because they caused terror in the land of the living.
24 “‘Eʹlam is there with all her hordes around her grave, all of them fallen by the sword. They have gone down uncircumcised to the land below, those who caused terror in the land of the living. Now they will bear their shame with those going down into the pit.
25 They have made a bed for her among the slain, along with all her hordes around her graves. All of them are uncircumcised, slain by the sword, because they caused terror in the land of the living; and they will bear their shame with those going down into the pit. He has been put among the slain.
26 “‘There is where Meʹshech and Tuʹbal and all their hordes are. Her graves are all around him. All of them are uncircumcised, pierced through by the sword, because they caused terror in the land of the living.
27 Will they not lie with mighty uncircumcised warriors who have fallen, who went down to the Grave with their weapons of war? And they will put their swords under their heads and their sins on their bones, because these mighty warriors terrorized the land of the living.
28 But as for you, you will be crushed among the uncircumcised ones, and you will lie with those who were slain by the sword.
29 “‘Eʹdom is there, her kings and all her chieftains, who despite their mightiness, were laid among those slain by the sword; they too will lie with the uncircumcised ones and with those going down into the pit.
30 “‘There all the princes of the north are, along with all the Si·doʹni·ans, who have gone down in disgrace with the slain, despite the terror caused by their mightiness. They will lie uncircumcised with those who were slain by the sword and will bear their shame with those going down into the pit.
31 “‘Pharʹaoh will see all of these, and he will be comforted over all that happened to his hordes; Pharʹaoh and all his army will be slain by the sword,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
32 “‘Because he caused terror in the land of the living, Pharʹaoh and all his hordes will be laid to rest with the uncircumcised, with those slain by the sword,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
33 And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
2 “Son of man, speak to the sons of your people, and say to them, “‘Suppose that I bring a sword upon a land, and all the people of that land take a man and make him their watchman,
3 and he sees the sword coming upon the land and blows the horn and warns the people.
4 If someone hears the sound of the horn but does not heed the warning and a sword comes and takes his life, his blood will be on his own head.
5 He heard the sound of the horn, but he did not heed the warning. His blood will be upon himself. If he had heeded the warning, his life would have been saved.
6 “‘But if the watchman sees the sword coming and he does not blow the horn and the people receive no warning and a sword comes and takes the life of one of them, that person will die for his own error, but I will ask his blood back from the watchman.’
7 “As for you, son of man, I have appointed you as a watchman to the house of Israel; and when you hear a word from my mouth you must warn them from me.
8 When I say to someone wicked, ‘Wicked one, you will surely die!’ but you do not speak out to warn the wicked one to change his course, he will die as a wicked man because of his own error, but I will ask his blood back from you.
9 But if you warn someone wicked to turn back from his way and he refuses to change his course, he will die for his error, but you will certainly save your own life.
10 “And you, son of man, say to the house of Israel, ‘You have said: “Our revolts and our sins weigh heavily upon us, causing us to waste away; so how will we keep living?”’
11 Tell them, ‘“As surely as I am alive,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, “I take no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but rather that someone wicked changes his way and keeps living. Turn back, turn back from your bad ways, for why should you die, O house of Israel?”’
12 “And you, son of man, tell the sons of your people, ‘The righteousness of the righteous man will not save him when he revolts; nor will the wickedness of the wicked man make him stumble when he turns away from his wickedness; nor will anyone righteous be able to keep living because of his righteousness in the day that he sins.
13 When I say to the righteous one: “You will surely keep living,” and he trusts in his own righteousness and does what is wrong, none of his righteous acts will be remembered, but he will die for the wrong that he has done.
14 “‘And when I say to the wicked one: “You will surely die,” and he turns away from his sin and does what is just and righteous,
15 and the wicked one returns what was taken in pledge and pays back what was taken by robbery, and he walks in the statutes of life by not doing what is wrong, he will surely keep living. He will not die.
16 None of the sins he committed will be held against him. For doing what is just and righteous, he will surely keep living.’
17 “But your people have said, ‘The way of Jehovah is unjust,’ when it is actually their way that is unjust.
18 “When someone righteous abandons his righteousness and does what is wrong, he must die for it.
19 But when someone wicked turns away from his wickedness and does what is just and righteous, he will keep living for doing so.
20 “But you have said, ‘The way of Jehovah is unjust.’ I will judge each of you according to his ways, O house of Israel.”
21 At length in the 12th year, in the tenth month, on the fifth day of the month of our exile, a man who had escaped from Jerusalem came to me and said: “The city has been struck down!”
22 Now the evening before the escaped man came, the hand of Jehovah had come upon me, and he had opened my mouth before the man came to me in the morning. So my mouth was opened, and I was no longer speechless.
23 Then the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
24 “Son of man, the inhabitants of these ruins are saying concerning the land of Israel, ‘Abraham was just one man, and yet he took possession of the land. But we are many; surely the land has been given to us as a possession.’
25 “Therefore say to them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “You are eating food with the blood, and you lift up your eyes to your disgusting idols, and you keep shedding blood. So why should you possess the land?
26 You have relied on your sword, you engage in detestable practices, and each of you has defiled his neighbor’s wife. So why should you possess the land?”’
27 “This is what you should say to them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “As surely as I am alive, those living in the ruins will fall by the sword; those in the open field, I will give as food to the wild beasts; and those in the strongholds and the caves will die by disease.
28 I will make the land an utterly desolate wasteland, and its arrogant pride will be brought to an end, and the mountains of Israel will be desolated, with no one passing through.
29 And they will have to know that I am Jehovah when I make the land an utterly desolate wasteland because of all the detestable things that they have done.”’
30 “As for you, son of man, your people are speaking with one another about you beside the walls and in the doorways of the houses. They are saying to each other, each to his brother, ‘Come, and let us hear the word that comes from Jehovah.’
31 They will crowd in to sit before you as my people; and they will hear your words, but they will not do them. For with their mouth they flatter you, but their heart is greedy for dishonest gain.
32 Look! You are to them like a romantic love song, sung with a beautiful voice and skillfully played on a stringed instrument. They will hear your words, but no one will act on them.
33 And when it comes true—and it will come true—they will have to know that a prophet has been among them.”
34 The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
2 “Son of man, prophesy against the shepherds of Israel. Prophesy, and say to the shepherds, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Woe to the shepherds of Israel, who have been feeding themselves! Is it not the flock that the shepherds should feed?
3 You eat the fat, you clothe yourselves with the wool, and you slaughter the fattest animal, but you do not feed the flock.
4 You have not strengthened the weak or healed the sick or bandaged the injured or brought back the strays or looked for the lost; rather, you have ruled them with harshness and tyranny.
5 So they were scattered because there was no shepherd; they were scattered and became food for every wild beast of the field.
6 My sheep were straying on all the mountains and on every high hill; my sheep were scattered over all the surface of the earth, with no one searching for them or seeking to find them.
7 “‘“Therefore, you shepherds, hear the word of Jehovah:
8 ‘“As surely as I am alive,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, “because my sheep have become prey, food for every wild beast of the field, for there was no shepherd, and my shepherds did not search for my sheep; rather, they kept feeding themselves and did not feed my sheep,”’
9 therefore, you shepherds, hear the word of Jehovah.
10 This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘I am against the shepherds, and I will demand an accounting of them for my sheep, and I will dismiss them from feeding my sheep, and the shepherds will no longer feed themselves. I will rescue my sheep from their mouth, and they will no longer be food for them.’”
11 “‘For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am, and I myself will search for my sheep, and I will care for them.
12 I will care for my sheep like a shepherd who has found his scattered sheep and is feeding them. I will rescue them from all the places where they were scattered in the day of clouds and thick gloom.
13 I will bring them out from the peoples and collect them together from the lands and bring them into their land and feed them on the mountains of Israel, by the streams and by all the dwelling places of the land.
14 In a good pasture I will feed them, and the land where they graze will be on Israel’s high mountains. They will lie down there in a good grazing land, and they will feed on choice pastures on the mountains of Israel.”
15 “‘“I myself will feed my sheep, and I myself will make them lie down,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
16 “The lost one I will search for, the stray I will bring back, the injured I will bandage, and the weak I will strengthen; but the fat one and the strong one I will annihilate. I will feed that one with judgment.”
17 “‘As for you, my sheep, this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I am about to judge between one sheep and another sheep, between the rams and the male goats.
18 Is it not enough for you to feed on the very best pastures? Must you also trample the rest of your pastures with your feet? And after drinking the clearest water, must you foul the water by stamping with your feet?
19 Should my sheep now feed on the pasture trampled by your feet and drink the water befouled by the stamping of your feet?”
20 “‘Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says to them: “Here I am, and I myself will judge between a fat sheep and a lean sheep,
21 for with your flank and shoulder you kept pushing, and with your horns you kept shoving all the sick ones until you had scattered them abroad.
22 And I will save my sheep, and they will no longer become something to prey upon; and I will judge between a sheep and a sheep.
23 I will raise up one shepherd over them, my servant David, and he will feed them. He himself will feed them and become their shepherd.
24 And I, Jehovah, will become their God, and my servant David a chieftain among them. I myself, Jehovah, have spoken.
25 “‘“And I will make a covenant of peace with them, and I will rid the land of vicious wild beasts, so that they may dwell securely in the wilderness and sleep in the forests.
26 I will make them and the area around my hill a blessing, and I will cause the rain to fall at the proper time. Blessings will pour down like the rains.
27 The trees of the field will yield their fruit, and the soil will give its produce, and they will dwell securely on the land. And they will have to know that I am Jehovah when I break their yoke bars and rescue them from those who enslaved them.
28 They will no longer become something for the nations to prey upon, and the wild beasts of the earth will not devour them, and they will dwell in security, with no one to make them afraid.
29 “‘“I will establish for them a plantation of fame, and they will no longer die from famine in the land, and they will no longer be humiliated by the nations.
30 ‘Then they will have to know that I, Jehovah their God, am with them and that they, the house of Israel, are my people,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”’
31 “‘As for you, my sheep, the sheep that I care for, you are but men, and I am your God,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
35 The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
2 “Son of man, turn your face toward the mountainous region of Seʹir, and prophesy against it.
3 Say to it, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am against you, O mountainous region of Seʹir, and I will stretch out my hand against you and make you a desolate wasteland.
4 I will turn your cities into ruins, and you will become a desolate wasteland; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.
5 For you showed unrelenting hostility, and you gave the Israelites over to the sword at the time of their disaster, at the time of their final punishment.”’
6 “‘Therefore as surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘I will prepare you for bloodshed, and bloodshed will pursue you. Since it was blood that you hated, bloodshed will pursue you.
7 I will make the mountainous region of Seʹir a desolate wasteland, and I will cut off from it anyone passing through and anyone returning.
8 I will fill its mountains with the slain; and those slain by the sword will fall on your hills, in your valleys, and in all your streams.
9 I will make you a perpetual desolation, and your cities will not be inhabited; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.’
10 “Because you said, ‘These two nations and these two lands will become mine, and we will take possession of both,’ even though Jehovah himself was there,
11 ‘therefore as surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘I will deal with you according to the same anger and jealousy that you displayed in your hatred toward them; and I will make myself known among them when I judge you.
12 You will then have to know that I myself, Jehovah, have heard all the insolent things you spoke against the mountains of Israel when you said, “They have been laid desolate and have been given to us to devour.”
13 And you spoke arrogantly against me, and you multiplied your words against me. I heard it all.’
14 “This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘The whole earth will rejoice when I will make you a desolate wasteland.
15 Just as you rejoiced when the inheritance of the house of Israel was laid desolate, that is how I will deal with you. You will become a desolate ruin, O mountainous region of Seʹir, yes, all of Eʹdom; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’”
36 “As for you, son of man, prophesy about the mountains of Israel and say, ‘O mountains of Israel, hear the word of Jehovah.
2 This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “The enemy has said against you, ‘Aha! Even the ancient high places have become our possession!’”’
3 “So prophesy and say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Because they have desolated and attacked you from every direction, so that you would become a possession of the survivors from among the nations and people keep talking about you and slandering you,
4 therefore, O mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah! This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says to the mountains and the hills, to the streams and the valleys, to the ruins that were desolated, and to the abandoned cities that have been plundered and ridiculed by the survivors of the nations around them;
5 to these the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘In the fire of my zeal I will speak against the survivors of the nations and against all Eʹdom, those who with great rejoicing and utter scorn have claimed my land as their own possession, to take over its pastures and to plunder it.’”’
6 “So prophesy concerning the land of Israel, and say to the mountains and to the hills, to the streams and to the valleys, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Look! I will speak in my zeal and in my rage, because you have borne humiliation by the nations.”’
7 “Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘I myself raise my hand in an oath that the surrounding nations will themselves bear their own shame.
8 But you, O mountains of Israel, will produce branches and bear your fruitage for my people Israel, for they will soon return.
9 For I am with you, and I will turn toward you, and you will be cultivated and sown with seed.
10 I will multiply your people—the whole house of Israel, all of it—and the cities will be inhabited and the ruins will be rebuilt.
11 Yes, I will multiply your people and your livestock; they will increase and be fruitful. And I will cause you to be inhabited as you were formerly, and I will make you prosper more than in the past; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.
12 I will cause people—my people Israel—to walk upon you, and they will take possession of you. You will become their inheritance, and you will never again make them childless.’”
13 “This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because they are saying to you, “You are a land that devours people and bereaves your nations of children,”’
14 ‘therefore, you will no longer devour people or make your nations childless,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
15 ‘I will not subject you to any more insults of the nations or make you bear the taunts of people, and you will no longer cause your nations to stumble,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
16 And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
17 “Son of man, when the house of Israel was dwelling in their land, they made it unclean by their ways and their dealings. Their ways were like the uncleanness of menstruation to me.
18 So I poured out my rage on them because of the blood that they had shed upon the land and because they made the land unclean with their disgusting idols.
19 So I scattered them among the nations and dispersed them among the lands. I judged them according to their way and according to their dealings.
20 But when they came to those nations, people profaned my holy name by saying about them, ‘These are the people of Jehovah, but they had to leave his land.’
21 So I will show concern for my holy name, which the house of Israel profaned among the nations where they have gone.”
22 “Therefore say to the house of Israel, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Not for your sakes am I acting, O house of Israel, but for my holy name, which you profaned among the nations where you have gone.”’
23 ‘I will certainly sanctify my great name, which was profaned among the nations, which you profaned among them; and the nations will have to know that I am Jehovah,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘when I am sanctified among you before their eyes.
24 I will take you from the nations and gather you back from all the lands and bring you into your land.
25 I will sprinkle clean water on you, and you will become clean; I will cleanse you from all your uncleanness and from all your disgusting idols.
26 I will give you a new heart and put a new spirit inside you. I will remove the heart of stone from your body and give you a heart of flesh.
27 I will put my spirit inside you, and I will cause you to walk in my regulations, and you will observe and carry out my judicial decisions.
28 Then you will dwell in the land that I gave to your forefathers, and you will be my people and I will be your God.’
29 “‘I will save you from all your uncleanness and summon the grain and make it abound, and I will not bring famine upon you.
30 I will make the fruitage of the tree and the produce of the field abound, so that you may never again suffer the disgrace of famine among the nations.
31 Then you will remember your evil ways and your deeds that were not good, and you will loathe yourselves because of your guilt and your detestable practices.
32 But know this: I am not doing this for your sakes,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. ‘Instead, be ashamed and feel humiliated because of your ways, O house of Israel.’
33 “This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘In the day that I cleanse you from all your guilt, I will cause the cities to be inhabited and the ruins to be rebuilt.
34 The desolate land that was lying desolate for everyone passing by to see will be cultivated.
35 And people will say: “The desolate land has become like the garden of Eʹden, and the cities that were in ruins and desolate and torn down are now fortified and inhabited.”
36 And the nations that are left remaining around you will have to know that I myself, Jehovah, have built what was torn down, and I have planted what was desolate. I myself, Jehovah, have spoken, and I have done it.’
37 “This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘I will also let the house of Israel ask me to do this for them: I will multiply their people like a flock.
38 Like the flock of holy ones, like the flock of Jerusalem during her festivals, the cities that were in ruins will become full of flocks of people; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’”
37 The hand of Jehovah was upon me, and by his spirit Jehovah took me and set me down in the middle of the valley plain, and it was full of bones.
2 He had me pass all around them, and I saw that there were very many bones lying in the valley plain, and they were very dry.
3 He asked me: “Son of man, can these bones come to life?” To that I said: “Sovereign Lord Jehovah, you are the one who knows.”
4 So he said to me: “Prophesy over these bones, and say to them, ‘You dry bones, hear the word of Jehovah:
5 “‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says to these bones: “I will cause breath to enter you, and you will come to life.
6 I will put sinews and flesh on you, and I will cover you with skin and put breath in you, and you will come to life; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.”’”
7 Then I prophesied just as I had been commanded. As soon as I prophesied, there was a noise, a rattling sound, and the bones began to come together, bone to bone.
8 Then I saw sinews and flesh come on them, and skin covered over them. But there was still no breath in them.
9 He then said to me: “Prophesy to the wind. Prophesy, son of man, and say to the wind, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “From the four winds come in, O wind, and blow upon these people who were killed, so that they may come to life.”’”
10 So I prophesied just as he commanded me, and breath came into them, and they began to live and to stand on their feet, an extremely large army.
11 Then he said to me: “Son of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel. Here they are saying, ‘Our bones are dry, and our hope has perished. We are completely cut off.’
12 So prophesy and say to them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I will open your graves and raise you up from your graves, my people, and bring you to the land of Israel.
13 And you will have to know that I am Jehovah when I open your graves and when I raise you up out of your graves, O my people.”’
14 ‘I will put my spirit in you and you will come to life, and I will settle you on your land; and you will have to know that I myself, Jehovah, have spoken and I have done it,’ declares Jehovah.”
15 The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
16 “And you, son of man, take a stick and write on it, ‘For Judah and for the people of Israel who are with him.’ Then take another stick and write on it, ‘For Joseph, the stick of Eʹphra·im, and all the house of Israel who are with him.’
17 Then bring them close to each other so that they become just one stick in your hand.
18 When your people say to you, ‘Will you not tell us what these things mean?’
19 tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Eʹphra·im, and the tribes of Israel who are with him, and I will join them to the stick of Judah; and I will make them one stick, and they will become one in my hand.”’
20 The sticks that you write on should be in your hand for them to see.
21 “Then tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I will take the Israelites from among the nations where they have gone, and I will collect them together from every direction and bring them to their land.
22 I will make them one nation in the land, on the mountains of Israel, and one king will rule over all of them, and they will no longer be two nations; nor will they be divided any longer into two kingdoms.
23 They will no longer defile themselves with their disgusting idols and their detestable practices and all their transgressions. I will save them from all their unfaithfulness by which they have sinned, and I will cleanse them. They will be my people, and I myself will be their God.
24 “‘“My servant David will be their king, and they will all have one shepherd. They will walk in my judicial decisions and carefully observe my statutes.
25 They will dwell on the land that I gave to my servant, to Jacob, where your forefathers lived, and they will dwell on it forever, they and their children and their children’s children; and David my servant will be their chieftain forever.
26 “‘“And I will make a covenant of peace with them; it will be an eternal covenant with them. I will establish them and make them many and place my sanctuary among them forever.
27 My tent will be with them, and I will be their God, and they will be my people.
28 And the nations will have to know that I, Jehovah, am sanctifying Israel when my sanctuary is in their midst forever.”’”
38 The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
2 “Son of man, set your face against Gog of the land of Maʹgog, the head chieftain of Meʹshech and Tuʹbal, and prophesy against him.
3 Say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am against you, O Gog, head chieftain of Meʹshech and Tuʹbal.
4 I will turn you around and put hooks in your jaws and bring you out with all your army, horses and horsemen, all of them clothed in splendor, a vast assembly with large shields and bucklers, all of them wielding swords;
5 Persia, E·thi·oʹpi·a, and Put are with them, all of them with buckler and helmet;
6 Goʹmer and all its troops, the house of To·garʹmah from the remotest parts of the north, along with all its troops—many peoples are with you.
7 “‘“Be ready, prepare yourselves, you with all your armies that are assembled with you, and you will be their commander.
8 “‘“You will be given attention after many days. In the final part of the years you will invade the land whose people have been restored from the ravages of the sword, collected together out of many peoples onto the mountains of Israel, which had long been lying devastated. The inhabitants of this land were restored from the peoples, and all of them dwell in security.
9 You will come against them like a storm, and you will cover the land like clouds, you and all your troops and many peoples with you.”’
10 “This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘In that day thoughts will come into your heart, and you will devise an evil plan.
11 You will say: “I will invade the land of unprotected settlements. I will come against those living in security, without disturbance, all of them living in settlements unprotected by walls, bars, or gates.”
12 It will be to take much spoil and plunder, to attack the devastated places that are now inhabited and a people regathered from the nations, who are accumulating wealth and property, those who are living in the center of the earth.
13 “‘Sheʹba and Deʹdan, the merchants of Tarʹshish and all its warriors will say to you: “Are you invading to get much spoil and plunder? Have you assembled your armies to carry off silver and gold, to take wealth and property, to seize a very great spoil?”’
14 “So prophesy, son of man, and say to Gog, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “On that day when my people Israel are dwelling in security, will you not know it?
15 You will come from your place, from the remotest parts of the north, you and many peoples with you, all of them riding on horses, a great assembly, a vast army.
16 Like clouds covering the land, you will come against my people Israel. In the final part of the days I will bring you against my land so that the nations may know me when I sanctify myself through you before their eyes, O Gog.”’
17 “This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Are you not the same one I spoke about in the former days through my servants the prophets of Israel, who prophesied for many years that you would be brought against them?’
18 “‘On that day, the day when Gog invades the land of Israel,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘my great rage will flare up.
19 In my zeal, in the fire of my fury, I will speak; and in that day there will be a great earthquake in the land of Israel.
20 Because of me the fish of the sea, the birds of the sky, the wild beasts of the field, all the reptiles that creep on the ground, and all humans on the surface of the earth will tremble, and the mountains will be thrown down, and the cliffs will fall, and every wall will collapse to the ground.’
21 “‘I will call for a sword against him on all my mountains,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. ‘Every man’s sword will be against his own brother.
22 I will bring my judgment against him with pestilence and bloodshed; and I will rain down a torrential downpour and hailstones and fire and sulfur on him and on his troops and on the many peoples with him.
23 And I will certainly magnify myself and sanctify myself and make myself known before the eyes of many nations; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’
39 “And you, son of man, prophesy against Gog, and tell him, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I am against you, Gog, head chieftain of Meʹshech and Tuʹbal.
2 I will turn you around and lead you and make you come up from the remotest parts of the north and bring you in upon the mountains of Israel.
3 I will knock your bow out of your left hand and make your arrows fall from your right hand.
4 On the mountains of Israel you will fall, you and all your troops and the peoples who will be with you. I will give you as food to all kinds of birds of prey and the wild beasts of the field.”’
5 “‘You will fall on the open field, for I myself have spoken,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
6 “‘And I will send fire against Maʹgog and against those who are inhabiting the islands in security, and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.
7 I will make my holy name known among my people Israel, and I will not allow my holy name to be profaned any longer; and the nations will have to know that I am Jehovah, the Holy One in Israel.’
8 “‘Yes, this is coming, and it will be done,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. ‘This is the day I have spoken about.
9 The inhabitants of the cities of Israel will go out and make fires with the weapons—the bucklers and shields, the bows and arrows, the war clubs and lances. And they will use them to light fires for seven years.
10 They will not need to take wood from the field or gather firewood from the forests because they will use the weapons to light fires.’ “‘They will take spoil from those who despoiled them and plunder from those who had been plundering them,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
11 “‘On that day I will give Gog a burial place there in Israel, in the valley of those who travel east of the sea, and it will block the path of those passing through. That is where they will bury Gog and all his hordes, and they will call it the Valley of Hamon-Gog.
12 The house of Israel will spend seven months burying them in order to cleanse the land.
13 All the people of the land will work at burying them, and this will bring them fame in the day that I glorify myself,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
14 “‘Men will be assigned to pass through the land constantly and bury the bodies left remaining on the surface of the earth, in order to cleanse it. They will continue the search for seven months.
15 When those who pass through the land see a human bone, they will set up a marker beside it. Then those assigned to do the burying will bury it in the Valley of Hamon-Gog.
16 And there will also be a city there named Ha·moʹnah. And they will cleanse the land.’
17 “As for you, son of man, this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Say to every sort of bird and to all the wild beasts of the field, “Gather yourselves together and come. Gather all around my sacrifice that I am preparing for you, a great sacrifice on the mountains of Israel. You will eat flesh and drink blood.
18 You will eat the flesh of mighty ones and drink the blood of the chieftains of the earth—the rams, lambs, goats, and bulls—all the fattened animals of Baʹshan.
19 You will gorge yourselves on fat and drink blood until you are drunk from the sacrifice that I prepare for you.”’
20 “‘At my table you will be filled up with horses and charioteers, mighty ones and all sorts of warriors,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
21 “‘I will display my glory among the nations, and all the nations will see the judgment that I have executed and the power that I have demonstrated among them.
22 From that day on the house of Israel will have to know that I am Jehovah their God.
23 And the nations will have to know that the house of Israel went into exile because of their own error, because they were unfaithful to me. So I hid my face from them and handed them over to their enemies, and they all fell by the sword.
24 I dealt with them according to their uncleanness and their transgressions, and I hid my face from them.’
25 “Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘I will restore the captives of Jacob and have mercy on the whole house of Israel; and I will zealously defend my holy name.
26 After they have been humiliated for all their unfaithfulness toward me, they will dwell securely on their land, with no one to make them afraid.
27 When I bring them back from the peoples and collect them together from the lands of their enemies, I will also sanctify myself among them before the eyes of many nations.’
28 “‘They will have to know that I am Jehovah their God when I send them into exile among the nations and then gather them back to their land, not leaving any of them behind.
29 I will not hide my face from them any longer, for I will pour out my spirit on the house of Israel,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
44 He brought me back by way of the outer gate of the sanctuary facing east, and it was shut.
2 Then Jehovah said to me: “This gate will remain shut. It is not to be opened, and no human will enter by it; for Jehovah, the God of Israel, has entered through it, so it must remain shut.
3 However, the chieftain will sit in it to eat bread before Jehovah, for he is a chieftain. He will come in through the porch of the gate, and he will go out through it.”
4 Then he brought me through the north gate to the front of the temple. When I looked, I saw that the glory of Jehovah had filled the temple of Jehovah. So I fell with my face to the ground.
5 Then Jehovah said to me: “Son of man, pay attention, watch, and listen carefully to everything I tell you about the statutes and the laws of the temple of Jehovah. Pay close attention to the entryway of the temple and all the exits of the sanctuary.
6 You must say to the rebellious house of Israel, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “That is enough of your detestable practices, O house of Israel.
7 When you bring foreigners who are uncircumcised in heart and flesh into my sanctuary, they profane my temple. You present my bread, fat and blood, while my covenant is being broken because of all your detestable practices.
8 You have not taken care of my holy things. Instead, you assign others to take care of the duties in my sanctuary.”’
9 “‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “No foreigner living in Israel who is uncircumcised in heart and in flesh may enter my sanctuary.”’
10 “‘But the Levites who strayed far from me when Israel strayed from me to follow their disgusting idols will bear the consequences of their error.
11 And they will become ministers in my sanctuary to oversee the gates of the temple and to minister at the temple. They will slaughter the whole burnt offering and the sacrifice for the people, and they will stand before the people to minister to them.
12 Because they ministered to them before their disgusting idols and became a stumbling block causing the house of Israel to sin, that is why I have raised my hand against them in an oath,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘and they will bear the consequences of their error.
13 They will not approach me to serve as my priests or approach any of my holy or most holy things, and they will bear their shame because of the detestable things that they did.
14 But I will make them caretakers of the responsibilities of the temple, to take care of its service and all the things that should be done in it.’
15 “‘As for the Levitical priests, the sons of Zaʹdok, who took care of the responsibilities of my sanctuary when the Israelites strayed from me, they will approach me to minister to me, and they will stand before me to offer me the fat and the blood,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
16 ‘They are the ones who will enter my sanctuary, and they will approach my table to minister to me, and they will take care of their responsibilities to me.
17 “‘When they come into the gates of the inner courtyard, they should wear linen garments. They should not wear any wool when they minister in the gates of the inner courtyard or inside it.
18 They should wear linen turbans on their head, and linen shorts should cover their hips. They should not wear anything that makes them perspire.
19 Before they go out to the outer courtyard—the outer courtyard where the people are—they should remove the garments they were ministering in and place them in the holy dining rooms. Then they will put on other garments, so that they will not transmit holiness to the people with their garments.
20 They should not shave their head or let the hair of their head grow long. They should trim the hair of their heads.
21 The priests should not drink wine when they enter the inner courtyard.
22 They should not take a widow or a divorced woman as a wife; but they may marry either a virgin of the offspring of Israel or the widow of a priest.’
23 “‘They should instruct my people about the difference between what is holy and what is common; and they will teach them the difference between what is unclean and what is clean.
24 They should preside as judges in a legal case; they must judge it in harmony with my judicial decisions. They should keep my laws and my statutes regarding all my festivals and sanctify my sabbaths.
25 They should not approach any dead human, or they will become unclean. However, they may make themselves unclean for their father, mother, son, daughter, brother, or an unmarried sister.
26 And after the purification of a priest, they should count off seven days for him.
27 On the day he enters into the holy place, into the inner courtyard, to minister in the holy place, he should present his sin offering,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
28 “‘And this will be their inheritance: I am their inheritance. You should not give them any possession in Israel, for I am their possession.
29 They will be the ones to eat the grain offering, the sin offering, and the guilt offering, and every devoted thing in Israel will become theirs.
30 The choicest of all the first ripe fruits and every sort of contribution from you will belong to the priests. And you should give the firstfruits of your coarse meal to the priest. This will cause a blessing to rest on your households.
31 The priests should not eat any bird or animal that was found dead or torn to pieces.’
1 In the third year of the kingship of King Je·hoiʹa·kim of Judah, King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon came to Jerusalem and besieged it.
2 In time Jehovah gave King Je·hoiʹa·kim of Judah into his hand, along with some of the utensils of the house of the true God, and he brought them to the land of Shiʹnar to the house of his god. He placed the utensils in the treasury of his god.
3 Then the king ordered Ashʹpe·naz his chief court official to bring some of the Israelites, including those of royal and noble descent.
4 They were to be youths without any defect, of good appearance, endowed with wisdom, knowledge, and discernment, and capable of serving in the king’s palace. He was to teach them the writing and the language of the Chal·deʹans.
5 Furthermore, the king assigned to them a daily ration from the king’s delicacies and from the wine he drank. They were to be trained for three years, and at the end of that time they were to enter the king’s service.
6 Now among them were some from the tribe of Judah: Daniel, Han·a·niʹah, Mishʹa·el, and Az·a·riʹah.
7 And the principal court official assigned names to them; he gave to Daniel the name Bel·te·shazʹzar, to Han·a·niʹah the name Shaʹdrach, to Mishʹa·el the name Meʹshach, and to Az·a·riʹah the name A·bedʹne·go.
8 But Daniel resolved in his heart that he would not defile himself with the king’s delicacies or with the wine he drank. So he asked the principal court official for permission not to defile himself in this way.
9 And the true God caused the principal court official to show Daniel favor and mercy.
10 But the principal court official said to Daniel: “I am afraid of my lord the king, who has assigned your food and drink. What if he should see you looking worse in appearance than the other youths of your age? You would make me guilty before the king.”
11 But Daniel said to the guardian whom the principal court official had appointed over Daniel, Han·a·niʹah, Mishʹa·el, and Az·a·riʹah:
12 “Please, test your servants for ten days, and let us be given some vegetables to eat and water to drink;
13 then compare our appearance with the appearance of the youths who are eating the king’s delicacies, and deal with your servants according to what you see.”
14 So he agreed to their proposal and tested them for ten days.
15 At the end of ten days their appearance was better and healthier than all the youths who were eating the king’s delicacies.
16 So the guardian would take away their delicacies and their wine and give them vegetables.
17 And the true God gave these four youths knowledge and insight into every kind of writing and wisdom; and Daniel was given understanding in all sorts of visions and dreams.
18 At the end of the time that the king had specified to bring them in, the principal court official brought them in before Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar.
19 When the king spoke with them, no one in the entire group was found to be like Daniel, Han·a·niʹah, Mishʹa·el, and Az·a·riʹah; and they continued to serve before the king.
20 In every matter requiring wisdom and understanding that the king would ask them about, he found them ten times better than all the magic-practicing priests and the conjurers in his entire realm.
21 And Daniel remained there until the first year of King Cyrus.
2 In the second year of his kingship, Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had a number of dreams, and he was so agitated that he could not sleep.
2 So the king gave the order to summon the magic-practicing priests, the conjurers, the sorcerers, and the Chal·deʹans to tell the king his dreams. So they came in and stood before the king.
3 Then the king said to them: “I have had a dream, and I am agitated because I want to know what I dreamed.”
4 The Chal·deʹans replied to the king in the Ar·a·maʹic language: “O king, may you live on forever. Relate the dream to your servants, and we will tell the interpretation.”
5 The king answered the Chal·deʹans: “This is my final word: If you do not make the dream known to me, along with its interpretation, you will be dismembered, and your houses will be turned into public latrines.
6 But if you do tell the dream and its interpretation, you will receive from me gifts and a reward and great honor. So tell me the dream and its interpretation.”
7 They answered a second time: “Let the king relate the dream to his servants, and we will tell its interpretation.”
8 The king replied: “I am well-aware that you are trying to gain time, for you realize what my final word is.
9 If you do not make the dream known to me, there is only one penalty for all of you. But you have agreed to tell me something false and deceitful until the situation changes. So tell me the dream, and I will know that you can explain its interpretation.”
10 The Chal·deʹans answered the king: “There is not a man on earth who is able to do what the king demands, for no great king or governor has asked such a thing of any magic-practicing priest or conjurer or Chal·deʹan.
11 What the king is asking is difficult, and no one exists who could tell the king this except the gods, who do not dwell among mortals.”
12 At this the king flew into a violent rage and gave the order to destroy all the wise men of Babylon.
13 When the order was issued and the wise men were about to be killed, they also looked for Daniel and his companions to put them to death.
14 At that time Daniel discreetly and cautiously spoke to Arʹi·och the chief of the king’s bodyguard, who had gone out to kill the wise men of Babylon.
15 He asked Arʹi·och the officer of the king: “Why is there such a harsh order from the king?” Then Arʹi·och informed Daniel about the matter.
16 So Daniel went in and asked the king to grant him time to tell the interpretation to the king.
17 Daniel then went to his house and informed his companions Han·a·niʹah, Mishʹa·el, and Az·a·riʹah of the matter.
18 He asked them to pray for mercy from the God of heaven concerning this secret, so that Daniel and his companions would not be destroyed along with the rest of the wise men of Babylon.
19 Then the secret was revealed to Daniel in a vision at night. So Daniel praised the God of heaven.
20 Daniel declared: “Let the name of God be praised for all eternity, For wisdom and mightiness are his alone.
21 He changes times and seasons, Removes kings and sets up kings, Gives wisdom to the wise and knowledge to those with discernment.
22 He reveals the deep things and the hidden things, He knows what is in the darkness, And with him the light dwells.
23 To you, O God of my forefathers, I offer thanks and praise, Because you have given me wisdom and power. And now you have made known to me what we requested of you; You have made known to us the concern of the king.”
24 Daniel then went in to Arʹi·och, whom the king had appointed to destroy the wise men of Babylon, and he said to him: “Do not destroy any wise men of Babylon. Take me in before the king, and I will tell the interpretation to the king.”
25 Arʹi·och quickly took Daniel in before the king and said to him: “I have found a man of the exiles of Judah who can make known the interpretation to the king.”
26 The king said to Daniel, whose name was Bel·te·shazʹzar: “Can you really make known to me the dream that I saw, and its interpretation?”
27 Daniel replied to the king: “None of the wise men, conjurers, magic-practicing priests, or astrologers are able to tell the king the secret that he is asking.
28 But there is a God in the heavens who is a Revealer of secrets, and he has made known to King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar what is to happen in the final part of the days. This is your dream, and these are the visions of your head as you lay on your bed:
29 “As for you, O king, on your bed your thoughts turned to what is to take place in the future, and the Revealer of secrets has made known to you what is to happen.
30 As for me, this secret was not revealed to me because I have greater wisdom than anyone living; rather, it was to make the interpretation known to the king so that you may know the thoughts in your heart.
31 “You, O king, were watching, and you saw an immense image. That image, which was huge and extremely bright, was standing in front of you, and its appearance was terrifying.
32 The head of that image was of fine gold, its chest and its arms were of silver, its abdomen and its thighs were of copper,
33 its legs were of iron, and its feet were partly of iron and partly of clay.
34 You looked on until a stone was cut out, not by hands, and it struck the image on its feet of iron and of clay and crushed them.
35 At that time the iron, the clay, the copper, the silver, and the gold were, all together, crushed and became like the chaff from the summer threshing floor, and the wind carried them away so that not a trace of them could be found. But the stone that struck the image became a large mountain, and it filled the whole earth.
36 “This is the dream, and we will now tell the king its interpretation.
37 You, O king—the king of kings to whom the God of heaven has given the kingdom, the might, the strength, and the glory,
38 and into whose hand he has given men wherever they may dwell, as well as the beasts of the field and the birds of the heavens, and whom he has made ruler over all of them—you yourself are the head of gold.
39 “But after you another kingdom will rise, inferior to you; then another kingdom, a third one, of copper, that will rule over the whole earth.
40 “As for the fourth kingdom, it will be strong like iron. For just as iron crushes and pulverizes everything else, yes, like iron that shatters, it will crush and shatter all of these.
41 “And just as you saw the feet and the toes to be partly of clay of a potter and partly of iron, the kingdom will be divided, but some of the hardness of iron will be in it, just as you saw the iron mixed with soft clay.
42 And as the toes of the feet were partly of iron and partly of clay, so the kingdom will be partly strong and partly fragile.
43 Just as you saw iron mixed with soft clay, they will be mixed with the people; but they will not stick together, one to the other, just as iron does not mix with clay.
44 “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed. And this kingdom will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it alone will stand forever,
45 just as you saw that out of the mountain a stone was cut not by hands, and that it crushed the iron, the copper, the clay, the silver, and the gold. The Grand God has made known to the king what will happen in the future. The dream is true, and its interpretation is trustworthy.”
46 Then King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar fell down with his face to the ground before Daniel and paid homage to him. And he gave the order to offer a present and incense to him.
47 The king said to Daniel: “Truly your God is a God of gods and a Lord of kings and a Revealer of secrets, because you were able to reveal this secret.”
48 The king then elevated Daniel and gave him many fine gifts, and he made him the ruler over all the province of Babylon and the chief prefect over all the wise men of Babylon.
49 And at Daniel’s request, the king appointed Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go over the administration of the province of Babylon, but Daniel served in the king’s court.
7 In the first year of King Bel·shazʹzar of Babylon, Daniel saw a dream and visions of his head as he lay on his bed. Then he wrote down the dream; he recorded a complete account of the matters.
2 Daniel declared: “I was watching in my visions during the night, and look! the four winds of the heavens were stirring up the vast sea.
3 And four huge beasts came out of the sea, each different from the others.
4 “The first one was like a lion, and it had the wings of an eagle. I watched until its wings were plucked out, and it was lifted up from the earth and was made to stand up on two feet like a man, and it was given the heart of a man.
5 “And look! another beast, a second one, like a bear. It was raised up on one side, and three ribs were in its mouth between its teeth; and it was told, ‘Get up, eat much flesh.’
6 “After this I kept watching, and look! another beast, like a leopard, but on its back it had four wings like those of a bird. And the beast had four heads, and it was given authority to rule.
7 “After this I kept watching in the visions of the night, and I saw a fourth beast, fearsome and terrifying and unusually strong, and it had large iron teeth. It was devouring and crushing, and what was left it trampled down with its feet. It was different from all the other beasts that were prior to it, and it had ten horns.
8 While I considered the horns, look! another horn, a small one, came up among them, and three of the first horns were plucked up from before it. And look! there were eyes like human eyes in this horn, and there was a mouth speaking arrogantly.
9 “I kept watching until thrones were set in place and the Ancient of Days sat down. His clothing was white like snow, and the hair of his head was like clean wool. His throne was flames of fire; its wheels were a burning fire.
10 A stream of fire was flowing and going out from before him. A thousand thousands kept ministering to him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him. The Court took its seat, and books were opened.
11 “I kept watching at that time because of the sound of the arrogant words that the horn was speaking; I watched until the beast was killed and its body was destroyed and it was given over to be burned in the fire.
12 But as for the rest of the beasts, their rulerships were taken away, and their lives were prolonged for a time and a season.
13 “I kept watching in the visions of the night, and look! with the clouds of the heavens, someone like a son of man was coming; and he gained access to the Ancient of Days, and they brought him up close before that One.
14 And to him there were given rulership, honor, and a kingdom, that the peoples, nations, and language groups should all serve him. His rulership is an everlasting rulership that will not pass away, and his kingdom will not be destroyed.
15 “As for me, Daniel, my spirit was distressed within me because the visions of my head frightened me.
16 I went near to one of those who were standing there to ask him about the true meaning of this. So he replied and made known to me the interpretation of these things.
17 “‘These huge beasts, four in number, are four kings who will stand up from the earth.
18 But the holy ones of the Supreme One will receive the kingdom, and they will possess the kingdom forever, yes, forever and ever.’
19 “Then I wanted to know more about the fourth beast, which was different from all the others; it was extraordinarily fearsome, with iron teeth and copper claws, and it was devouring and crushing, and trampling down what was left with its feet;
20 and about the ten horns on its head, and the other horn that came up and before which three fell, the horn that had eyes and a mouth speaking arrogantly and whose appearance was bigger than that of the others.
21 “I kept watching as that horn made war on the holy ones, and it was prevailing against them,
22 until the Ancient of Days came and judgment was rendered in favor of the holy ones of the Supreme One, and the appointed time arrived for the holy ones to take possession of the kingdom.
23 “This is what he said: ‘As for the fourth beast, there is a fourth kingdom that will come to be on the earth. It will be different from all the other kingdoms, and it will devour all the earth and will trample it down and crush it.
24 As for the ten horns, ten kings will rise up out of that kingdom; and still another one will rise up after them, and he will be different from the first ones, and he will humiliate three kings.
25 He will speak words against the Most High, and he will continually harass the holy ones of the Supreme One. He will intend to change times and law, and they will be given into his hand for a time, times, and half a time.
26 But the Court sat, and they took away his rulership, in order to annihilate him and to destroy him completely.
27 “‘And the kingdom and the rulership and the grandeur of the kingdoms under all the heavens were given to the people who are the holy ones of the Supreme One. Their kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all rulerships will serve and obey them.’
28 “This is the end of the matter. As for me, Daniel, my thoughts alarmed me greatly, so that I turned pale; but I kept the matter in my own heart.”
8 In the third year of the kingship of King Bel·shazʹzar, a vision appeared to me, Daniel, after the one that appeared to me previously.
2 I saw the vision, and as I watched I was in Shuʹshan the citadel, which is in the province of Eʹlam; I viewed the vision, and I was next to the watercourse of Uʹlai.
3 As I raised my eyes, look! there was a ram standing before the watercourse, and it had two horns. The two horns were tall, but one was higher than the other, and the higher one came up later.
4 I saw the ram making thrusts to the west and to the north and to the south, and no wild beasts could stand before it, and there was no one who could provide rescue from its power. It did as it pleased and exalted itself.
5 As I kept watching, look! there was a male goat coming from the west crossing the surface of the whole earth without touching the ground. And the goat had a conspicuous horn between its eyes.
6 It was coming toward the ram with the two horns, which I had seen standing before the watercourse; it was running toward it in a powerful rage.
7 I saw it closing in on the ram, and it was filled with bitterness toward it. It struck down the ram and broke its two horns, and the ram was powerless to stand up to it. It threw the ram to the ground and trampled it down, and there was no one to rescue it from its power.
8 Then the male goat exalted itself exceedingly, but as soon as it became mighty, the great horn was broken; then four conspicuous horns came up instead of the one, toward the four winds of the heavens.
9 Out of one of them came another horn, a small one, and it grew very great toward the south and toward the east and toward the Decoration.
10 It grew so great that it reached all the way to the army of the heavens, and it caused some of the army and some of the stars to fall to the earth, and it trampled them down.
11 It exalted itself even against the Prince of the army, and from him the constant feature was taken away, and the established place of his sanctuary was thrown down.
12 And an army was given over, together with the constant feature, because of transgression; and it kept throwing truth to the earth, and it acted and had success.
13 And I heard a holy one speaking, and another holy one said to the one speaking: “How long will the vision of the constant feature and of the transgression causing desolation continue, to make both the holy place and the army things to trample on?”
14 So he said to me: “Until 2,300 evenings and mornings; and the holy place will certainly be restored to its right condition.”
15 While I, Daniel, was watching the vision and seeking to understand it, suddenly I saw standing in front of me someone who appeared to be a man.
16 Then I heard the voice of a man in the midst of the Uʹlai, and he called out: “Gaʹbri·el, make that one understand what he saw.”
17 So he came near to where I was standing, but when he came I was so terrified that I fell facedown. He said to me: “Understand, O son of man, that the vision is for the time of the end.”
18 But while he was speaking with me, I fell fast asleep with my face to the ground. So he touched me and made me stand up where I had been standing.
19 Then he said: “Here I am causing you to know what will happen in the final part of the denunciation, because it is for the appointed time of the end.
20 “The two-horned ram that you saw stands for the kings of Meʹdi·a and Persia.
21 The hairy male goat stands for the king of Greece; and the great horn that was between its eyes stands for the first king.
22 As for the horn that was broken, so that four stood up instead of it, there are four kingdoms from his nation that will stand up, but not with his power.
23 “And in the final part of their kingdom, as the transgressors act to a completion, a fierce-looking king who understands ambiguous sayings will stand up.
24 His power will become great, but not through his own power. He will bring ruin in an extraordinary way, and he will be successful and act effectively. He will bring mighty ones to ruin, also the people made up of the holy ones.
25 And by his cunning he will use deception to succeed; and in his heart he will exalt himself; and during a time of security he will bring many to ruin. He will even stand up against the Prince of princes, but he will be broken without human hand.
26 “What was said in the vision about the evenings and the mornings is true, but you must keep the vision secret, for it refers to a time many days from now.”
27 As for me, Daniel, I felt exhausted and I was sick for some days. Then I got up and carried out the king’s work; but I was numbed by what I had seen, and no one could understand it.
11 “As for me, in the first year of Da·riʹus the Mede, I stood up to strengthen and fortify him.
2 What I will tell you now is the truth: “Look! Three more kings will stand up for Persia, and the fourth one will amass greater riches than all others. And when he becomes strong by means of his riches, he will rouse up everything against the kingdom of Greece.
3 “And a mighty king will stand up and rule with extensive dominion and do as he pleases.
4 But when he has stood up, his kingdom will be broken and be divided toward the four winds of the heavens, but not to his descendants and not like the dominion with which he ruled; for his kingdom will be uprooted and go to others besides these.
5 “And the king of the south will become strong, that is, one of his princes; but one will prevail against him and will rule with extensive dominion, greater than that one’s ruling power.
6 “After some years they will make an alliance, and the daughter of the king of the south will come to the king of the north in order to make an equitable arrangement. But she will not retain the power of her arm; and he will not stand, nor his arm; and she will be given up, she and those bringing her in, and the one who caused her birth, and the one making her strong in those times.
7 And one from the sprout of her roots will stand up in his position, and he will come to the army and come against the fortress of the king of the north and will take action against them and prevail.
8 Also with their gods, with their metal images, with their desirable articles of silver and of gold, and with captives, he will come to Egypt. For some years he will stand off from the king of the north,
9 who will come against the kingdom of the king of the south, but will go back to his own land.
10 “As for his sons, they will prepare for war and assemble a vast, great army. He will certainly advance and sweep through like a flood. But he will go back, and he will wage war all the way to his fortress.
11 “And the king of the south will become bitter and will go out and fight with him, that is, with the king of the north; and he will muster a large crowd, but the crowd will be given into that one’s hand.
12 And the crowd will be carried away. His heart will become exalted, and he will cause tens of thousands to fall; but he will not make use of his strong position.
13 “And the king of the north will return and muster a crowd larger than the first; and at the end of the times, after some years, he will surely come with a large army and with many resources.
14 In those times many will stand up against the king of the south. “And the violent ones among your people will be carried along to try making a vision come true; but they will stumble.
15 “And the king of the north will come and throw up a siege rampart and capture a fortified city. And the arms of the south will not stand, nor will his select men; and they will have no power to stand.
16 The one coming against him will do as he pleases, and no one will stand before him. He will stand in the land of the Decoration, and ability to exterminate will be in his hand.
17 He will set his face to come with the full force of his kingdom, and there will be equitable terms with him; and he will act effectively. As regards the daughter of women, it will be granted to him to bring her to ruin. And she will not stand, and she will not continue to be his.
18 He will turn his face back to the coastlands and will capture many. And a commander will make the reproach from him cease for himself, so that his reproach will not be. He will make it turn back on that one.
19 Then he will turn his face back to the fortresses of his own land, and he will stumble and fall, and he will not be found.
20 “And there will stand up in his position one who causes an exactor to pass through the splendid kingdom, but in a few days he will be broken, though not in anger nor in warfare.
21 “And there will stand up in his position a despised one, and they will not give him the majesty of the kingdom; and he will come in during a time of security and take hold of the kingdom by means of smoothness.
22 And the arms of the flood will be swept away on account of him, and they will be broken; as will be the Leader of the covenant.
23 And because of their alliance with him, he will carry on deception and rise up and become mighty by means of a little nation.
24 During a time of security he will come into the richest parts of the province and do what his fathers and their fathers have not done. Plunder and spoil and goods he will distribute among them; and against fortified places he will plot his schemes, but only for a time.
25 “And he will muster his power and his heart against the king of the south with a large army, and the king of the south will prepare himself for the war with an exceedingly large and mighty army. And he will not stand, because they will plot schemes against him.
26 And those eating his delicacies will bring his downfall. “As for his army, it will be swept away, and many will fall down slain.
27 “As regards these two kings, their heart will be inclined to do what is bad, and they will sit at one table speaking lies to each other. But nothing will succeed, because the end is yet for the time appointed.
28 “And he will go back to his land with a great amount of goods, and his heart will be against the holy covenant. He will act effectively and go back to his land.
29 “At the time appointed he will return and come against the south. But this time will not be as it was before,
30 for the ships of Kitʹtim will come against him, and he will be humbled. “He will go back and hurl denunciations against the holy covenant and act effectively; and he will go back and will give attention to those leaving the holy covenant.
31 And arms will stand up, proceeding from him; and they will profane the sanctuary, the fortress, and remove the constant feature. “And they will put in place the disgusting thing that causes desolation.
32 “And those who act wickedly against the covenant, he will lead into apostasy by means of smooth words. But the people who know their God will prevail and act effectively.
33 And those having insight among the people will impart understanding to the many. And they will be made to stumble by sword and by flame, by captivity and by plundering, for some days.
34 But when they are made to stumble, they will be given a little help; and many will join with them by means of smooth speech.
35 And some of those having insight will be made to stumble, in order to do a refining work because of them and to do a cleansing and a whitening until the time of the end; because it is yet for the time appointed.
36 “The king will do as he pleases, and he will exalt himself and magnify himself above every god; and against the God of gods he will speak astonishing things. And he will prove successful until the denunciation comes to a finish; because what is determined must take place.
37 He will show no regard for the God of his fathers; nor will he show regard for the desire of women or for any other god, but he will magnify himself over everyone.
38 But instead he will give glory to the god of fortresses; to a god that his fathers did not know he will give glory by means of gold and silver and precious stones and desirable things.
39 He will act effectively against the most fortified strongholds, along with a foreign god. He will give great glory to those who give him recognition, and he will make them rule among many; and the ground he will apportion out for a price.
40 “In the time of the end the king of the south will engage with him in a pushing, and against him the king of the north will storm with chariots and horsemen and many ships; and he will enter into the lands and sweep through like a flood.
41 He will also enter into the land of the Decoration, and many lands will be made to stumble. But these are the ones that will escape out of his hand: Eʹdom and Moʹab and the main part of the Amʹmon·ites.
42 And he will keep thrusting out his hand against the lands; and as regards the land of Egypt, she will not escape.
43 And he will rule over the hidden treasures of gold and silver and over all the desirable things of Egypt. And the Libʹy·ans and the E·thi·oʹpi·ans will be at his steps.
44 “But reports out of the east and out of the north will disturb him, and he will go out in a great rage to annihilate and to devote many to destruction.
45 And he will plant his royal tents between the grand sea and the holy mountain of Decoration; and he will come all the way to his end, and there will be no helper for him.
12 “During that time Miʹcha·el will stand up, the great prince who is standing in behalf of your people. And there will occur a time of distress such as has not occurred since there came to be a nation until that time. And during that time your people will escape, everyone who is found written down in the book.
2 And many of those asleep in the dust of the earth will wake up, some to everlasting life and others to reproach and to everlasting contempt.
3 “And those having insight will shine as brightly as the expanse of heaven, and those bringing the many to righteousness like the stars, forever and ever.
4 “As for you, Daniel, keep the words secret, and seal up the book until the time of the end. Many will rove about, and the true knowledge will become abundant.”
5 Then I, Daniel, looked and saw two others standing there, one on this bank of the stream and one on the other bank of the stream.
6 Then one said to the man clothed in linen, who was up above the waters of the stream: “How long will it be to the end of these marvelous things?”
7 Then I heard the man clothed in linen, who was up above the waters of the stream, as he raised his right hand and his left hand to the heavens and swore by the One who is alive forever: “It will be for an appointed time, appointed times, and half a time. As soon as the dashing to pieces of the power of the holy people comes to an end, all these things will come to their finish.”
8 Now as for me, I heard, but I could not understand; so I said: “O my lord, what will be the outcome of these things?”
9 Then he said: “Go, Daniel, because the words are to be kept secret and sealed up until the time of the end.
10 Many will cleanse themselves and whiten themselves and will be refined. And the wicked ones will act wickedly, and none of the wicked will understand; but those having insight will understand.
11 “And from the time that the constant feature has been removed and the disgusting thing that causes desolation has been put in place, there will be 1,290 days.
12 “Happy is the one who keeps in expectation and who arrives at the 1,335 days!
13 “But as for you, go on to the end. You will rest, but you will stand up for your lot at the end of the days.”
1 The word of Jehovah that came to Ho·seʹa the son of Be·eʹri in the days of Uz·ziʹah, Joʹtham, Aʹhaz, and Hez·e·kiʹah, kings of Judah, and in the days of Jer·o·boʹam son of Joʹash, the king of Israel.
2 When Jehovah started to speak his word through Ho·seʹa, Jehovah said to Ho·seʹa: “Go, marry a woman of prostitution and have children of prostitution, because by prostitution the land has turned completely away from following Jehovah.”
3 So he went and married Goʹmer the daughter of Dib·laʹim, and she conceived and bore him a son.
4 Then Jehovah said to him: “Name him Jezʹre·el, for in a little while I will hold an accounting against the house of Jeʹhu for the acts of bloodshed of Jezʹre·el, and I will put an end to the royal rule of the house of Israel.
5 In that day I will break the bow of Israel in the Valley of Jezʹre·el.”
6 She conceived again and gave birth to a daughter. And He told him: “Name her Lo-ru·haʹmah, for I will no longer show mercy to the house of Israel, because I will certainly drive them away.
7 But I will show mercy to the house of Judah, and I will save them by Jehovah their God; I will not save them by bow or by sword or by war or by horses or by horsemen.”
8 After weaning Lo-ru·haʹmah, she conceived and gave birth to a son.
9 Then He said: “Name him Lo-amʹmi, because you are not my people and I will not be yours.
10 “And the number of the people of Israel will be like the grains of sand of the sea, which cannot be measured or numbered. And in the place where it was said to them, ‘You are not my people,’ it will be said to them, ‘The sons of the living God.’
11 And the people of Judah and of Israel will be gathered together into unity and will choose for themselves one head and go up out of the land, for great will be the day of Jezʹre·el.
2 “Say to your brothers, ‘My people!’ And to your sisters, ‘O woman shown mercy!’
2 Accuse your mother; accuse her, For she is not my wife and I am not her husband. She should remove her prostitution from herself And her adultery from between her breasts,
3 Or I will strip her naked and make her as in the day she was born, Making her like a wilderness, Reducing her to a waterless land, And causing her to die of thirst.
4 And to her sons I will not show mercy, For they are the sons of prostitution.
5 For their mother has committed prostitution. She who was pregnant with them has acted shamefully, for she said, ‘I will go after my passionate lovers, Those who give me my bread and my water, My wool and my linen, my oil and my drink.’
6 So I will block your way with a hedge of thorns; And I will raise up a stone wall against her, So that she cannot find her paths.
7 She will chase after her passionate lovers, but she will not overtake them; She will look for them, but she will not find them. Then she will say, ‘I will go back to my first husband, For I was better off at that time than I am now.’
8 She did not recognize that it was I who had given her the grain, the new wine, and the oil, And I who had given her silver in abundance And gold, which they used for Baʹal.
9 ‘Therefore, I will return and take away my grain in its time And my new wine in its season, And I will snatch away my wool and my linen that were to cover her nakedness.
10 Now I will expose her private parts in full view of her passionate lovers, And no man will rescue her out of my hand.
11 I will put an end to all her joy, Her festivals, her new moons, her sabbaths, and all her festive seasons.
12 And I will ruin her vines and her fig trees, of which she has said: “These are my wages, which my passionate lovers gave to me”; I will turn them into a forest, And the wild animals of the field will devour them.
13 I will hold an accounting against her for the days when she offered sacrifices to the Baʹal images, When she would adorn herself with her rings and ornaments and would chase after her passionate lovers, And I was the one she forgot,’ declares Jehovah.
14 ‘So I will persuade her, I will lead her into the wilderness, And I will speak to win her heart.
15 I will give her vineyards back to her from that time onward, And the Valley of Aʹchor as a gateway to hope; She will answer there as in the days of her youth, As in the day when she came out of the land of Egypt.
16 And in that day,’ declares Jehovah, ‘You will call me My husband, and you will no longer call me My master.’
17 ‘I will remove the names of the Baʹal images from her mouth, And they will no longer be remembered by their name.
18 In that day I will make a covenant for them with the wild animals of the field, And with the birds of the heavens and the creeping things of the ground; I will rid the land of the bow and the sword and war, And I will make them lie down in security.
19 I will engage myself to you forever; And I will engage myself to you in righteousness and in justice, In loyal love and in mercy.
20 I will engage myself to you in faithfulness, And you will certainly know Jehovah.’
21 ‘In that day I will answer,’ declares Jehovah, ‘I will answer the heavens, And they will answer the earth;
22 And the earth will answer the grain and the new wine and the oil; And they will answer Jezʹre·el.
23 I will sow her like seed for myself in the earth, And I will show mercy to her who was not shown mercy; I will say to those not my people: “You are my people,” And they will say: “You are my God.”’”
4 Hear the word of Jehovah, O people of Israel, For Jehovah has a legal case against the inhabitants of the land, Because there is no truth nor loyal love nor knowledge of God in the land.
2 False oaths and lying and murder And stealing and adultery are widespread, And one act of bloodshed follows another act of bloodshed.
3 That is why the land will mourn And every inhabitant in it will waste away; The wild animals of the field and the birds of the heavens, Even the fish of the sea, will perish.
4 “However, let no man contend or reprove, For your people are like those who contend against a priest.
5 So you will stumble in broad daylight, And the prophet will stumble with you, as if it were night. And I will silence your mother.
6 My people will be silenced, because there is no knowledge. Because you have rejected knowledge, I will also reject you from serving as my priest; And because you have forgotten the law of your God, I myself will forget your sons.
7 The more they increased, the more they sinned against me. I will change their glory into disgrace.
8 They feed on the sin of my people, And they are greedy for their error.
9 It will be the same for the people as for the priest; I will call them to account for their ways, And I will bring on them the consequences of their actions.
10 They will eat but not be satisfied. They will be promiscuous, but they will not increase, Because they have shown no regard for Jehovah.
11 Prostitution and wine and new wine Take away the motivation to do what is right.
12 My people consult their wooden idols, Doing what their staff tells them; Because the spirit of prostitution causes them to go astray, And by their prostitution they refuse to submit to their God.
13 On the tops of the mountains they sacrifice, And on the hills they make sacrifices smoke, Under oak trees and storax trees and every big tree, Because their shade is good. That is why your daughters commit prostitution And your daughters-in-law commit adultery.
14 I will not hold an accounting against your daughters because of their prostitution, And against your daughters-in-law because of their adultery. For the men go off with the harlots And sacrifice with the temple prostitutes; Such a people without understanding will come to ruin.
15 Although you are committing prostitution, O Israel, Let not Judah become guilty. Do not come to Gilʹgal or to Beth-aʹven, And do not swear, ‘As surely as Jehovah is alive!’
16 For like a stubborn cow, Israel has become stubborn. Will Jehovah now shepherd them like a young ram in an open pasture?
17 Eʹphra·im is joined to idols. Let him alone!
18 When their beer is finished, They become promiscuous. And her rulers dearly love dishonor.
19 The wind will wrap her in its wings, And they will be ashamed of their sacrifices.”
5 “Hear this, you priests, Pay attention, O house of Israel, Listen, O house of the king, For the judgment involves you; Because you are a trap to Mizʹpah And a net spread over Taʹbor.
2 And those falling away have sunk deep in slaughter, And I am warning all of them.
3 I know Eʹphra·im, And Israel is not hidden from me. For now, O Eʹphra·im, you have acted promiscuously; Israel has defiled itself.
4 Their dealings do not permit them to return to their God, Because there is a spirit of prostitution among them; And Jehovah they do not acknowledge.
5 The pride of Israel has testified against him; Both Israel and Eʹphra·im have stumbled in their error, And Judah has stumbled with them.
6 With their flock and their herd they went to look for Jehovah, But they could not find him. He had drawn away from them.
7 They have betrayed Jehovah, For they have fathered foreign sons. Now a month will devour them and their portions.
8 Blow a horn in Gibʹe·ah, a trumpet in Raʹmah! Shout a war cry at Beth-aʹven—after you, O Benjamin!
9 O Eʹphra·im, you will become an object of horror in the day of punishment. I have made known what will surely happen among the tribes of Israel.
10 The princes of Judah are like those moving a boundary. I will pour out my fury on them like water.
11 Eʹphra·im is oppressed, crushed by judgment, For he was determined to follow after his adversary.
12 So I was like a moth to Eʹphra·im And like rottenness to the house of Judah.
13 When Eʹphra·im saw his sickness, and Judah his ulcer, Eʹphra·im went to As·syrʹi·a and sent to a great king. But he was unable to heal you, And he could not cure your ulcer.
14 For I will be like a young lion to Eʹphra·im, And like a strong lion to the house of Judah. I myself will tear to pieces and go away; I will carry them off, and no one will rescue them.
15 I will go away and return to my place until they bear the consequences of their guilt, And then they will seek my favor. When they are in distress, they will seek me.”
6 “Come, and let us return to Jehovah, For he has torn us to pieces, but he will heal us. He struck us, but he will bind our wounds.
2 He will revive us after two days. On the third day he will raise us up, And we will live before him.
3 We will know, we will earnestly seek to know Jehovah. His going out is as certain as the dawn; He will come to us like a pouring rain, Like a spring rain that saturates the earth.”
4 “What should I do with you, Eʹphra·im? What should I do with you, Judah? For your loyal love is like the morning clouds, Like the dew that quickly vanishes.
5 That is why I will cut them down by means of the prophets; I will kill them with the words of my mouth. And the judgments on you will shine as the light.
6 For in loyal love I delight, not in sacrifice, And in the knowledge of God, rather than in whole burnt offerings.
7 But they, like mere men, have violated the covenant. There they have betrayed me.
8 Gilʹe·ad is a town of evildoers, Covered with footprints of blood.
9 The company of priests are like marauder bands lying in ambush for a man. They murder on the road at Sheʹchem, For their conduct is shameful.
10 I have seen a horrible thing in the house of Israel. There Eʹphra·im practices prostitution; Israel has defiled itself.
11 Furthermore, O Judah, a harvest is set for you, When I gather back the captives of my people.”
7 “At the time when I would heal Israel, The error of Eʹphra·im is also exposed, And the wickedness of Sa·marʹi·a. For they practice deception; Thieves break in and marauder bands raid outside.
2 But they do not say in their heart that I will remember all their wickedness. Now their dealings are all around them; They are right in front of my face.
3 They make the king rejoice by their wickedness, And princes by their deceit.
4 All of them are adulterers, Burning like an oven fired by a baker, Who stops stirring the fire after kneading the dough until it is leavened.
5 On the day of our king, princes have become sick —They are enraged because of wine. He has reached out his hand to ridiculers.
6 For they approach with hearts burning like an oven. All night long the baker sleeps; In the morning the oven blazes like a flaming fire.
7 All of them are hot like an oven, And they devour their rulers. All their kings have fallen; No one among them calls out to me.
8 Eʹphra·im mixes with the nations. Eʹphra·im is like a round cake left unturned.
9 Strangers have consumed his strength, but he does not know it. And his gray hairs have turned white, but he does not notice it.
10 The pride of Israel has testified against him, But they have not returned to Jehovah their God, Nor have they looked for him despite all of this.
11 Eʹphra·im is like a simpleminded dove, lacking good sense. They have called out to Egypt; they have gone to As·syrʹi·a.
12 Wherever they go, I will spread my net over them. I will bring them down like the birds of the heavens. I will discipline them according to the warning given to their assembly.
13 Woe to them, for they have fled from me! Devastation to them, for they have transgressed against me! I was ready to redeem them, but they have spoken lies against me.
14 From their heart they did not call to me for help, Although they kept wailing on their beds. For their grain and new wine they would slash themselves; They turn against me.
15 Although I disciplined them and strengthened their arms, They are against me, scheming what is bad.
16 They changed course, but not to anything loftier; They were as unreliable as a loose bow. Their princes will fall by the sword because of their defiant tongues. For this they will be an object of ridicule in the land of Egypt.”
8 “Put a horn to your mouth! One comes like an eagle against the house of Jehovah, For they have violated my covenant and transgressed against my law.
2 To me they cry out, ‘My God, we, Israel, know you!’
3 Israel has rejected what is good. Let an enemy pursue him.
4 They have appointed kings, but not through me. They have appointed princes, but I did not recognize them. With their silver and their gold they have made idols, To their own destruction.
5 Your calf has been rejected, O Sa·marʹi·a. My anger flares up against them. How long will they be incapable of innocence?
6 For this is from Israel. A craftsman made it, and it is not God; The calf of Sa·marʹi·a will be reduced to splinters.
7 For it is wind that they are sowing, And they will reap a storm wind. No stalk produces ripe grain; Whatever sprouts produces no flour. If any is produced, foreigners will swallow it down.
8 Israel will be swallowed down. Now they will be among the nations, Like an unwanted vessel.
9 For they have gone up to As·syrʹi·a, like a lone wild donkey. Eʹphra·im has hired lovers.
10 Although they hire them from among the nations, I will now round them up; They will begin to suffer because of the burden imposed by king and princes.
11 For Eʹphra·im has multiplied altars to sin. They became his altars for sinning.
12 I wrote for him the many things of my law, But they were regarded as something strange.
13 They offer sacrificial gifts to me, and they eat the meat, But Jehovah takes no pleasure in them. Now he will remember their error and punish them for their sins. They have turned back to Egypt.
14 Israel has forgotten his Maker and has built temples, And Judah has multiplied fortified cities. But I will send fire into his cities, And it will consume the towers of each one.”
9 “Do not rejoice, O Israel, Do not act joyfully like the peoples. For by prostitution you have strayed from your God. You have loved the wages of a prostitute on every threshing floor of grain.
2 But the threshing floor and winepress will not feed them, And new wine will fail her.
3 They will not continue dwelling in the land of Jehovah; Instead, Eʹphra·im will return to Egypt, And in As·syrʹi·a they will eat what is unclean.
4 They will no longer pour out wine offerings to Jehovah; Their sacrifices will not please him. They are like the bread of mourning; All those eating it will defile themselves. For their bread is for themselves alone; It will not come into the house of Jehovah.
5 What will you do in the day of meeting, In the day of Jehovah’s festival?
6 For look! they will have to flee because of destruction. Egypt will gather them together, and Memʹphis will bury them. Nettles will take possession of their precious things of silver, And thornbushes will be in their tents.
7 The days of reckoning will come, The days of retribution will come, And Israel will know it. Their prophet will be a fool, and the man of inspiration will go mad; Because your error is abundant, the animosity against you is abundant.”
8 The watchman of Eʹphra·im was with my God. But now all the ways of his prophets are as the traps of a birdcatcher; There is animosity in the house of his God.
9 They have sunk deep into ruin, as in the days of Gibʹe·ah. He will remember their error and punish their sins.
10 “Like grapes in the wilderness I found Israel. Like the first of the early figs on a fig tree I saw your forefathers. But they went to Baʹal of Peʹor; They dedicated themselves to the shameful thing, And they became disgusting like the object of their love.
11 Eʹphra·im’s glory flies away like a bird; There is no giving birth, no pregnancy, and no conception.
12 Even if they raise children, I will bereave them until no man is left; Yes, woe to them when I turn away from them!
13 Eʹphra·im, planted in a pasture, was to me like Tyre; Now Eʹphra·im must bring his sons out to the slaughter.”
14 Give them, O Jehovah, what you should give them; A womb that miscarries and dry breasts.
15 “All their wickedness was in Gilʹgal, for there I came to hate them. I will drive them away from my house because of their evil deeds. I will no longer love them; All their princes are stubborn.
16 Eʹphra·im will be struck down. Their root will dry up, and they will produce no fruit. Even if they give birth, I will put to death their cherished offspring.”
17 My God will reject them, For they have not listened to him, And they will become fugitives among the nations.
10 “Israel is a degenerate vine yielding its fruit. The more his fruit increases, the more he multiplies his altars; The better his land produces, the more splendid his sacred pillars.
2 Their heart is hypocritical; Now they will be found guilty. There is one who will break their altars and destroy their pillars.
3 Now they will say, ‘We have no king, for we have not feared Jehovah. And what could a king do for us?’
4 They speak empty words, make false oaths, and make covenants; So the judgment that springs up is like poisonous weeds in the furrows of the field.
5 The residents of Sa·marʹi·a will fear for the calf idol of Beth-aʹven. Its people will mourn over it, As will its foreign-god priests who rejoiced over it and its glory, For it will go away from them into exile.
6 It will be brought to As·syrʹi·a as a gift to a great king. Eʹphra·im will be put to shame, And Israel will be ashamed because of the advice it followed.
7 Sa·marʹi·a and her king will certainly be done away with, Like a snapped-off twig on the surface of waters.
8 The high places of Beth-aʹven, the sin of Israel, will be annihilated. Thorns and thistles will grow on their altars. People will say to the mountains, ‘Cover us!’ And to the hills, ‘Fall over us!’
9 From the days of Gibʹe·ah you have sinned, O Israel. There they have persisted. War did not overtake the sons of unrighteousness in Gibʹe·ah.
10 I will also discipline them when I please. And peoples will be gathered against them, When their two errors are harnessed on them.
11 Eʹphra·im was a trained heifer that loved to thresh, So I spared her fair neck. Now I will make someone ride Eʹphra·im. Judah will plow; Jacob will harrow for him.
12 Sow seed for yourselves in righteousness and reap loyal love. Plow for yourselves arable land While there is time to search for Jehovah, Until he comes and instructs you in righteousness.
13 But you have plowed wickedness, You have reaped unrighteousness, And you have eaten the fruitage of deception; For you have trusted in your own way, In the multitude of your warriors.
14 An uproar will rise against your people, And your fortified cities will all be devastated, Like the devastation by Shalʹman of the house of Arʹbel, In the day of battle when mothers were dashed to pieces alongside their children.
15 This is what will be done to you, O Bethʹel, because of your utter wickedness. At dawn the king of Israel will surely be done away with.”
11 “When Israel was a boy, I loved him, And out of Egypt I called my son.
2 The more they called them, The more they went away from them. They kept sacrificing to the Baʹal images And offering sacrifices to the graven images.
3 But it was I who taught Eʹphra·im to walk, taking them in my arms; And they did not acknowledge that I had healed them.
4 With the ropes of men I kept drawing them, with the cords of love; And I was to them like one lifting a yoke from their jaws, And I gently brought food to each one.
5 They will not return to the land of Egypt, but As·syrʹi·a will be their king, Because they refused to return to me.
6 And a sword will whirl against his cities And destroy his bars and devour them because of their schemes.
7 My people are bent on unfaithfulness to me. Though they called them upward, no one rises up.
8 How can I give you up, O Eʹphra·im? How can I hand you over, O Israel? How can I treat you like Adʹmah? How can I make you like Ze·boiʹim? I have had a change of heart; At the same time my compassions are stirred.
9 I will not vent my burning anger. I will not destroy Eʹphra·im again, For I am God and not man, The Holy One in your midst; And I will not come against you in fury.
10 They will walk after Jehovah, and he will roar like a lion; When he roars, his sons will come trembling from the west.
11 They will tremble like a bird when they come out of Egypt, Like a dove out of the land of As·syrʹi·a; And I will settle them in their houses,” declares Jehovah.
12 “Eʹphra·im has surrounded me with lies, And the house of Israel with deceit. But Judah still roams with God, And he is faithful to the Most Holy One.”
12 “Eʹphra·im is feeding on wind. He chases after the east wind all day long. He multiplies lies and violence. They make a covenant with As·syrʹi·a and take oil to Egypt.
2 Jehovah has a legal case against Judah; He will call for an accounting against Jacob according to his ways, And he will repay him according to his deeds.
3 In the womb he seized his brother by the heel, And with his vigor he contended with God.
4 He kept contending with an angel and prevailed. He wept and begged for his favor.” He found him at Bethʹel, and there He spoke with us,
5 Jehovah the God of armies, Jehovah is his memorial name.
6 “So return to your God, Maintain loyal love and justice, And always hope in your God.
7 But in the hand of the tradesman are deceptive scales; He loves to defraud.
8 Eʹphra·im keeps saying, ‘Indeed, I have become rich; I have found wealth. And in all my toil, they will not find anything wrong or sinful.’
9 But I am Jehovah your God from the land of Egypt. I will again make you dwell in tents As in the days of an appointed time.
10 I spoke to the prophets, I multiplied their visions, And I spoke parables through the prophets.
11 With Gilʹe·ad there has been deception and untruth. In Gilʹgal they have sacrificed bulls, And their altars are like piles of stones in the furrows of the field.
12 Jacob ran away to the territory of Aʹram; Israel served there for a wife, And for a wife he guarded sheep.
13 By a prophet Jehovah brought Israel up from Egypt, And by a prophet he was guarded.
14 Eʹphra·im has caused bitter offense; His bloodguilt remains on him; His Lord will repay him for his reproach.”
13 “When Eʹphra·im spoke, there was trembling; He was prominent in Israel. But he became guilty with regard to Baʹal and died.
2 Now they add to their sin And make metal statues from their silver; They skillfully make idols, all the work of craftsmen. To them they say, ‘Let the men who sacrifice kiss the calves.’
3 So they will become like the morning clouds, Like the dew that vanishes early, Like chaff blown from the threshing floor by a storm, And like smoke out of the hole in the roof.
4 But I am Jehovah your God from the land of Egypt; You knew no God except me, And besides me there is no savior.
5 I knew you in the wilderness, in the land of drought.
6 They were satisfied with their pastures, They were satisfied and their heart became proud. And so they forgot me.
7 I will become like a young lion to them, Like a leopard lurking along the path.
8 I will come upon them like a bear that has lost its cubs, And I will rip open their chest. I will devour them there like a lion; A wild beast of the field will tear them to pieces.
9 It will destroy you, O Israel, Because you turned against me, against your helper.
10 Where, then, is your king, that he may save you in all your cities, And your rulers, of whom you said, ‘Give me a king and princes’?
11 I gave you a king in my anger, And I will take him away in my fury.
12 The error of Eʹphra·im is wrapped up; His sin is stored up.
13 The pangs of childbirth will come for him. But he is an unwise child; He does not present himself when it is time to be born.
14 From the power of the Grave I will redeem them; From death I will recover them. Where are your stings, O Death? Where is your destructiveness, O Grave? Compassion will be concealed from my eyes.
15 Even if he should flourish among the reeds, An east wind will come, the wind of Jehovah, From the desert it comes, to dry up his well and drain his spring. That one will pillage the treasury of all his precious things.
16 Sa·marʹi·a will be held guilty, for she has rebelled against her God. By the sword they will fall, Their children will be dashed to pieces, And their pregnant women will be ripped open.”
14 “Come back, O Israel, to Jehovah your God, For you have stumbled because of your error.
2 Come back to Jehovah with these words, Say to him, ‘May you pardon our error and accept what is good, And we will offer the praise of our lips as we would young bulls.
3 As·syrʹi·a will not save us. We will not ride on horses, And we will no longer say, “O our God!” to the work of our hands, For it is by you that the fatherless child is shown mercy.’
4 I will heal their unfaithfulness. I will love them of my own free will, Because my anger has turned away from him.
5 I will become like the dew to Israel; He will blossom like the lily And will send down his roots like the trees of Lebʹa·non.
6 His twigs will spread, His splendor will be like that of the olive tree, And his fragrance like that of Lebʹa·non.
7 They will again dwell in his shadow. They will grow grain and will bud like the vine. His fame will be like the wine of Lebʹa·non.
8 Eʹphra·im will say, ‘What more do I have to do with idols?’ I will answer and watch over him. I will be like a thriving juniper tree. From me your fruit will be found.”
9 Who is wise? Let him understand these things. Who is discreet? Let him know them. For the ways of Jehovah are upright, And the righteous will walk in them; But the transgressors will stumble in them.
1 The word of Jehovah that came to Joel the son of Pe·thuʹel:
2 “Hear this, you elders, And pay attention, all you inhabitants of the land. Has anything like this happened in your days Or in the days of your forefathers?
3 Tell about it to your sons, And let your sons tell about it to their sons, And their sons to the next generation.
4 What was left by the devouring locust, the swarming locust has eaten; And what was left by the swarming locust, the unwinged locust has eaten; And what the unwinged locust has left, the voracious locust has eaten.
5 Wake up, you drunkards, and weep! Wail, all you wine drinkers, Because the sweet wine has been taken from your mouths.
6 For a nation has come up into my land, mighty and without number. Its teeth are the teeth of a lion, and its jaws are those of a lion.
7 It has devastated my vine and turned my fig tree into a stump, Stripping them completely bare and tossing them aside, Leaving their twigs white.
8 Wail as a virgin wearing sackcloth does For the bridegroom of her youth.
9 Grain offering and drink offering have ceased from the house of Jehovah; The priests, the ministers of Jehovah, are in mourning.
10 The field has been devastated, the ground mourns; For the grain has been devastated, the new wine has dried up, the oil has failed.
11 Farmers are dismayed, vinedressers wail, Because of the wheat and the barley; For the harvest of the field has perished.
12 The vine has dried up, The fig tree has withered. The pomegranate, the palm, and the apple, All the trees of the field have dried up; For joy has turned to shame among the people.
13 Put on sackcloth and mourn, you priests; Wail, you ministers of the altar. Come in and spend the night in sackcloth, you ministers of my God; For grain offering and drink offering have been withheld from the house of your God.
14 Proclaim a fast; call for a solemn assembly. Gather the elders together, with all the inhabitants of the land, To the house of Jehovah your God, and cry to Jehovah for help.
15 Woe because of the day! For the day of Jehovah is near, And it will come like a destruction from the Almighty!
16 Has not food been taken from before our very eyes, And rejoicing and joy from the house of our God?
17 The seeds have shriveled under their shovels. Storehouses are desolate. Granaries have been torn down, for the grain has dried up.
18 Even the livestock groan! The herds of cattle wander in confusion, for they have no pasture! And the flocks of sheep bear the punishment.
19 To you, O Jehovah, I will call; For fire has devoured the pastures of the wilderness, And a flame has consumed all the trees of the field.
20 Even the wild beasts long for you, Because the streams of water have dried up And fire has devoured the pastures of the wilderness.”
2 “Blow a horn in Zion! Shout a war cry in my holy mountain. Let all the inhabitants of the land tremble, For the day of Jehovah is coming! It is near!
2 It is a day of darkness and gloom, A day of clouds and thick gloom, Like light of dawn spreading out on the mountains. There is a people numerous and mighty; Never before has there been one like it, And never again will there be another Through the years of all generations.
3 Ahead of it a fire devours, And behind it a flame consumes. The land ahead of it is like the garden of Eʹden, But behind it is a desolate wilderness, And nothing can escape.
4 Its appearance is like the appearance of horses, And they run like warhorses.
5 The sound is like that of chariots as they leap on the mountaintops, Like the crackling of a blazing fire that consumes stubble. It is like a mighty people drawn up in battle formation.
6 Because of them, peoples will be in anguish. Every face will grow flushed.
7 They charge like warriors, They scale a wall like soldiers, Each keeps to his own course, And they do not swerve from their paths.
8 They do not shove one another; Each man advances in his course. If the weapons cause some to fall, The others do not break ranks.
9 Into the city they rush, on the wall they run. Onto the houses they climb, through the windows they enter like a thief.
10 Before them the land trembles and the heavens rock. Sun and moon have become dark, And the stars have lost their brightness.
11 Jehovah will raise his voice before his army, for his camp is very numerous. For the one carrying out His word is mighty; For the day of Jehovah is great and very awe-inspiring. Who can endure it?”
12 “Yet even now,” declares Jehovah, “return to me with all your hearts, With fasting and weeping and wailing.
13 Rip apart your hearts, and not your garments, And return to Jehovah your God, For he is compassionate and merciful, slow to anger and abundant in loyal love, And he will reconsider the calamity.
14 Who knows whether he will turn back and reconsider And leave behind a blessing, A grain offering and a drink offering for Jehovah your God?
15 Blow a horn in Zion! Proclaim a fast; call for a solemn assembly.
16 Gather the people; sanctify the congregation. Collect the old men; gather the children and nursing infants. Let the bridegroom go out from his inner chamber, and the bride from her bridal chamber.
17 Between the porch and the altar Let the priests, the ministers of Jehovah, weep and say: ‘Do feel pity, O Jehovah, for your people; Do not make your inheritance an object of scorn, Letting the nations rule over them. Why should the peoples say, “Where is their God?”’
18 Then Jehovah will be zealous for his land And show compassion on his people.
19 Jehovah will answer his people: ‘Here I am sending to you grain and new wine and oil, And you will be fully satisfied; I will no longer make you a reproach among the nations.
20 I will drive the northerner far away from you; I will disperse him to a dry and desolate wasteland, With his vanguard toward the eastern sea And his rear guard toward the western sea. The foul smell from him will ascend, The stench from him will keep ascending; For He will do great things.’
21 Do not be afraid, O land. Be joyful and rejoice, for Jehovah will do great things.
22 Do not be afraid, you beasts of the field, For the pastures of the wilderness will become green, And the trees will bear fruit; The fig tree and the vine must give their full yield.
23 You sons of Zion, be joyful and rejoice in Jehovah your God; For he will give you the autumn rain in the right amount, And he will send upon you a downpour, The autumn rain and the spring rain, as before.
24 The threshing floors will be full of pure grain, And the presses will overflow with new wine and oil.
25 And I will make compensation to you for the years That the swarming locust, the unwinged locust, the voracious locust, and the devouring locust have eaten, My great army that I sent among you.
26 You will surely eat to satisfaction, And you will praise the name of Jehovah your God, Who has done wonders in your behalf; My people will never again be put to shame.
27 And you will have to know that I am in the midst of Israel And that I am Jehovah your God—there is no other! My people will never again be put to shame.
28 After that I will pour out my spirit on every sort of flesh, And your sons and your daughters will prophesy, Your old men will dream dreams, And your young men will see visions.
29 And even on my male slaves and female slaves I will pour out my spirit in those days.
30 And I will give wonders in the heavens and on the earth, Blood and fire and columns of smoke.
31 The sun will be turned into darkness and the moon into blood Before the coming of the great and awe-inspiring day of Jehovah.
32 And everyone who calls on the name of Jehovah will be saved; For on Mount Zion and in Jerusalem there will be those who escape, just as Jehovah has said, The survivors whom Jehovah calls.”
3 “For look! in those days and in that time, When I bring back the captives of Judah and Jerusalem,
2 I will also gather together all the nations And bring them down to the Valley of Je·hoshʹa·phat. I will enter into judgment with them there In behalf of my people and my inheritance Israel, For they scattered them among the nations, And they divided up my land among themselves.
3 For my people they cast lots; They would trade a boy to hire a prostitute And sell a girl for wine to drink.
4 Also, what do you have against me, O Tyre and Siʹdon and all the regions of Phi·lisʹti·a? Are you repaying me for something? If you are repaying me, I will swiftly, speedily bring your repayment on your heads.
5 Because you have taken my silver and gold, And you have brought my finest treasures into your temples;
6 And the people of Judah and Jerusalem you have sold to the Greeks, In order to remove them far from their territory;
7 Here I am rousing them to come from the place where you sold them, And I will bring your repayment on your heads.
8 I will sell your sons and daughters into the hand of the people of Judah, And they will sell them to the men of Sheʹba, to a nation far away; For Jehovah himself has spoken it.
9 Proclaim this among the nations: ‘Prepare for war! Stir up the mighty men! Let all the soldiers draw near, let them advance!
10 Beat your plowshares into swords and your pruning shears into spears. Let the weak one say: “I am powerful.”
11 Come and help, all you surrounding nations, assemble together!’” To that place, O Jehovah, bring down your powerful ones.
12 “Let the nations be roused and come up to the Valley of Je·hoshʹa·phat; For there I will sit in order to judge all the surrounding nations.
13 Thrust in a sickle, for the harvest is ripe. Come down and tread, for the winepress is full. The vats overflow, for their badness is abundant.
14 Crowds, crowds are in the valley of the decision, For the day of Jehovah is near in the valley of the decision.
15 Sun and moon will become dark, And the stars will lose their brightness.
16 And Jehovah will roar out of Zion, Out of Jerusalem he will raise his voice. And heaven and earth will rock; But Jehovah will be a refuge for his people, A fortress for the people of Israel.
17 And you will have to know that I am Jehovah your God, residing in Zion, my holy mountain. Jerusalem will become a holy place, And strangers will pass through her no more.
18 In that day the mountains will drip with sweet wine, The hills will flow with milk, And the streams of Judah will all flow with water. Out of the house of Jehovah a spring will flow, And it will irrigate the Valley of the Acacia Trees.
19 But Egypt will become desolate, And Eʹdom will be a desolate wilderness, Because of the violence done to the people of Judah, In whose land they shed innocent blood.
20 But Judah will always be inhabited, And Jerusalem to generation after generation.
21 I will consider innocent their blood that I had not considered innocent; And Jehovah will reside in Zion.”
1 The words of Aʹmos, who was among the sheep raisers from Te·koʹa, which he received in vision concerning Israel in the days of King Uz·ziʹah of Judah and in the days of Jer·o·boʹam son of Joʹash, the king of Israel, two years before the earthquake.
2 He said: “Jehovah will roar out of Zion, And he will raise his voice out of Jerusalem. The pastures of the shepherds will mourn, And the summit of Carʹmel will dry up.”
3 “This is what Jehovah says, ‘“For three revolts of Damascus, and for four, I will not reverse it, Because they threshed Gilʹe·ad with iron threshing sledges.
4 So I will send a fire upon the house of Hazʹa·el, And it will consume the fortified towers of Ben-haʹdad.
5 I will break the bars of Damascus; I will destroy the inhabitants from Bikʹath-aʹven And the one ruling from Beth-eʹden; And the people of Syria will go as exiles to Kir,” says Jehovah.’
6 This is what Jehovah says, ‘“For three revolts of Gazʹa, and for four, I will not reverse it, Because they took a whole group of exiles to hand them over to Eʹdom.
7 So I will send a fire onto the wall of Gazʹa, And it will consume her fortified towers.
8 I will destroy the inhabitants from Ashʹdod, And the one ruling from Ashʹke·lon; I will turn my hand against Ekʹron, And the remaining Phi·lisʹtines will perish,” says the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.’
9 This is what Jehovah says, ‘For three revolts of Tyre, and for four, I will not reverse it, Because they handed over a whole group of exiles to Eʹdom, And because they did not remember the covenant of brothers.
10 So I will send a fire onto the wall of Tyre, And it will consume her fortified towers.’
11 This is what Jehovah says, ‘For three revolts of Eʹdom, and for four, I will not reverse it, Because he pursued his own brother with the sword, And because he refused to show mercy; In his anger he keeps tearing them apart relentlessly, And he remains furious with them continually.
12 So I will send a fire into Teʹman, And it will consume the fortified towers of Bozʹrah.’
13 This is what Jehovah says, ‘“For three revolts of the Amʹmon·ites, and for four, I will not reverse it, Because they ripped open the pregnant women of Gilʹe·ad to widen out their own territory.
14 So I will set fire to the wall of Rabʹbah, And it will consume her fortified towers, With a war cry in the day of battle, With a tempest in the day of storm wind.
15 And their king will go into exile together with his princes,” says Jehovah.’
3 “Hear this word that Jehovah has spoken concerning you, O people of Israel, concerning the whole family that I brought up out of the land of Egypt:
2 ‘You alone I have known out of all the families of the earth. That is why I will call you to account for all your errors.
3 Will two walk together unless they have agreed to meet?
4 Will a lion roar in the forest when it has no prey? Will a young lion growl from its lair when it has caught nothing?
5 Will a bird fall into a trap on the ground when there is no snare for it? Does a trap spring up from the ground when it has caught nothing?
6 If a horn is blown in a city, do the people not tremble? If a calamity occurs in the city, is it not Jehovah who has acted?
7 For the Sovereign Lord Jehovah will not do a thing Unless he has revealed his confidential matter to his servants the prophets.
8 The lion has roared! Who will not be afraid? The Sovereign Lord Jehovah has spoken! Who will not prophesy?’
9 ‘Proclaim it on the fortified towers of Ashʹdod And on the fortified towers in the land of Egypt. Say: “Gather together against the mountains of Sa·marʹi·a; See the turmoil in her midst And the defrauding within her.
10 For they do not know how to do what is right,” declares Jehovah, “Those who are storing up violence and destruction in their fortified towers.”’
11 Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says, ‘An adversary will surround the land, He will strip you of your strength, And your fortified towers will be plundered.’
12 This is what Jehovah says, ‘Just as the shepherd snatches away two legs or a piece of an ear from the mouth of the lion, That is how the people of Israel will be snatched away, Those now sitting in Sa·marʹi·a on splendid beds and on fine couches.’
13 ‘Hear and warn the house of Jacob,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, the God of armies.
14 ‘For in the day I call Israel to account for all his revolts, I will also call for an accounting against the altars of Bethʹel; The horns of the altar will be cut off and fall to the earth.
15 I will strike down the winter house along with the summer house.’ ‘The houses of ivory will perish, And the great houses will come to their end,’ declares Jehovah.”
4 “Hear this word, you cows of Baʹshan, Who are on the mountain of Sa·marʹi·a, You women who are defrauding the lowly and crushing the poor, Who say to their husbands, ‘Bring us something to drink!’
2 The Sovereign Lord Jehovah has sworn by his holiness, ‘“Look! The days are coming upon you when he will lift you up with butcher hooks And the rest of you with fishhooks.
3 You will go out through the breaches in the wall, each one straight ahead; And you will be cast out to Harʹmon,” declares Jehovah.’
4 ‘Come to Bethʹel and commit transgression, To Gilʹgal and transgress even more! Bring your sacrifices in the morning, And your tithes on the third day.
5 Burn a thanksgiving sacrifice of leavened bread; Loudly proclaim your voluntary offerings! For that is what you love to do, O people of Israel,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
6 ‘And for my part, I made your teeth clean of food in all your cities And caused a lack of bread in all your houses; But you did not come back to me,’ declares Jehovah.
7 ‘I also withheld rain from you three months before the harvest; I made it rain on one city but not on another city. One plot of land would have rain, But another plot of land where there was no rain would dry up.
8 People of two or three cities staggered to one city to drink water, And they would not get satisfied; But you did not come back to me,’ declares Jehovah.
9 ‘I struck you with scorching heat and mildew. You multiplied your gardens and vineyards, But the locust would devour your fig trees and olive trees; And you still did not come back to me,’ declares Jehovah.
10 ‘I sent among you a pestilence like that of Egypt. With the sword I killed your young men and captured your horses. I made the stench of your camps rise up into your nostrils; But you did not come back to me,’ declares Jehovah.
11 ‘I caused an overthrow among you Like God’s overthrow of Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah. And you were like a log snatched out of the fire; But you did not come back to me,’ declares Jehovah.
12 So that is what I will do to you, O Israel. Because this is what I will do to you, Get ready to meet your God, O Israel.
13 For look! he is the One who formed the mountains and created the wind; He tells man what His thoughts are, He turns the dawn into darkness, And he treads on earth’s high places; Jehovah the God of armies is his name.”
6 “Woe to the self-assured ones in Zion, To those feeling secure in the mountain of Sa·marʹi·a, The prominent men of the foremost of nations, Those to whom the house of Israel comes!
2 Cross over to Calʹneh and see. Go from there to Great Haʹmath, And go down to Gath of the Phi·lisʹtines. Are they better than these kingdoms, Or is their territory larger than yours?
3 Are you putting out of your mind the day of calamity And bringing in a reign of violence?
4 They lie on beds of ivory and sprawl out on couches, Eating the rams of the flock and the fattened calves;
5 They improvise songs to the sound of the harp, And like David, they invent musical instruments;
6 They drink wine by the bowlful And anoint themselves with the choicest oils. But they are unconcerned about the catastrophe of Joseph.
7 So they will go into exile at the head of the exiles, And the revelry of those sprawled out will come to an end.
8 ‘The Sovereign Lord Jehovah has sworn by himself,’ declares Jehovah the God of armies, ‘“I detest the pride of Jacob, I hate his fortified towers, And I will hand over the city and what fills it.
9 “‘“And if ten men are left in one house, they will also die.
10 A relative will come to carry them out and burn them one by one. He will bring their bones out from the house; then he will say to whoever is in the inner rooms of the house, ‘Are there any more with you?’ And he will say, ‘Nobody!’ Then he will say, ‘Keep silent! For it is not the time to make any mention of the name of Jehovah.’”
11 For it is Jehovah giving the command, And he will strike down the great house into rubble, And the small house into debris.
12 Do horses run on a crag, Or will one plow there with cattle? For you have turned justice into a poisonous plant, And the fruit of righteousness into wormwood.
13 You rejoice over what is worthless, And you say, “Have we not become powerful in our own strength?”
14 Therefore, O house of Israel, I will bring against you a nation,’ declares Jehovah the God of armies, ‘And they will oppress you from Leʹbo-haʹmath down to the Wadi of the Arʹa·bah.’”
7 This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah showed me: Look! He formed a locust swarm when the late crop was beginning to come up. This was the later crop after the king’s hay had been cut.
2 When the swarm finished eating up the vegetation of the land, I said: “O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, please forgive! How can Jacob survive? For he is weak!”
3 So Jehovah reconsidered this. “It will not happen,” Jehovah said.
4 This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah showed me: Look! The Sovereign Lord Jehovah called for a punishment by fire. It consumed the vast deep waters, and it consumed a portion of the land.
5 Then I said: “O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, please hold this back. How can Jacob survive? For he is weak!”
6 So Jehovah reconsidered this. “That too will not happen,” the Sovereign Lord Jehovah said.
7 This is what he showed me: Look! Jehovah was standing on a wall made with a plumb line, and there was a plumb line in his hand.
8 Then Jehovah said to me: “What do you see, Aʹmos?” So I said: “A plumb line.” Jehovah then said: “Here I am putting a plumb line among my people Israel. I will no longer pardon them.
9 The high places of Isaac will be desolated, and the sanctuaries of Israel will be devastated; and I will come against the house of Jer·o·boʹam with a sword.”
10 Am·a·ziʹah the priest of Bethʹel sent this message to King Jer·o·boʹam of Israel: “Aʹmos is conspiring against you right in the midst of the house of Israel. The land cannot put up with all his words.
11 For this is what Aʹmos says, ‘Jer·o·boʹam will die by the sword, and Israel will surely go into exile from its land.’”
12 Am·a·ziʹah then said to Aʹmos: “O visionary, go, run away to the land of Judah, earn your bread there, and there you may prophesy.
13 But you must no longer prophesy at Bethʹel, for it is the sanctuary of a king and the house of a kingdom.”
14 Then Aʹmos answered Am·a·ziʹah: “I was not a prophet nor the son of a prophet; but I was a herdsman, and I took care of sycamore fig trees.
15 But Jehovah took me away from following the flock, and Jehovah said to me, ‘Go, prophesy to my people Israel.’
16 So now hear the word of Jehovah: ‘You are saying, “Do not prophesy against Israel, and do not preach against the house of Isaac.”
17 Therefore this is what Jehovah says: “Your wife will become a prostitute in the city, and your sons and your daughters will fall by the sword. Your land will be apportioned out with a measuring line, and you yourself will die in an unclean land; and Israel will surely go into exile from its land.”’”
8 This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah showed me: Look! There was a basket of summer fruit.
2 Then he said, “What do you see, Aʹmos?” I replied, “A basket of summer fruit.” Then Jehovah said to me: “The end has come for my people Israel. I will no longer pardon them.
3 ‘The songs of the temple will turn into wailing in that day,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. ‘There will be many carcasses thrown everywhere—hush!’
4 Hear this, you who trample on the poor And who bring the meek of the land to an end,
5 Who say, ‘When will the new moon festival be over, that we may sell our grain, And the Sabbath, that we may offer grain for sale? So that we may make the eʹphah measure smaller And the shekel weight greater, To falsify our scales of deception;
6 So that we may buy the needy for silver And the poor for a pair of sandals, And sell the worthless part of the grain.’
7 Jehovah has sworn by the Pride of Jacob, ‘Never will I forget all their deeds.
8 On this account the land will tremble, And every inhabitant in it will mourn. Will it not all rise like the Nile, And surge and sink down like the Nile of Egypt?’
9 ‘In that day,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘I will make the sun go down at high noon, And I will darken the land on a bright day.
10 I will turn your festivals into mourning And all your songs into dirges. I will put sackcloth on all hips and make every head bald; I will make it like the mourning for an only son, And the end of it like a bitter day.’
11 ‘Look! The days are coming,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘When I will send a famine into the land, Not a famine for bread or a thirst for water, But for hearing the words of Jehovah.
12 They will stagger from sea to sea And from the north to the east. They will rove about searching for the word of Jehovah, but they will not find it.
13 In that day beautiful virgins will faint, Also young men, because of the thirst;
14 Those who swear by the guilt of Sa·marʹi·a and who say, “As surely as your god lives, O Dan!” And, “As surely as the way of Beʹer-sheʹba lives!” They will fall, and they will not rise up again.’”
9 I saw Jehovah stationed above the altar, and he said: “Strike the head of the pillar, and the thresholds will shake. Cut them off at the head, and I will kill the last of them with the sword. No one who flees will get away, and no one trying to escape will succeed.
2 If they dig down into the Grave, From there my hand will take them; And if they go up to the heavens, From there I will bring them down.
3 And if they hide themselves on the top of Carʹmel, From there I will search them out and take them. If they conceal themselves from my eyes on the bottom of the sea, There I will command the serpent to bite them.
4 If they go into captivity before their enemies, From there I will command the sword, and it will kill them; I will fix my eyes on them for bad, and not for good.
5 For the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of the armies, is the One who touches the land, So that it melts, and all its inhabitants will mourn; And all of it will rise like the Nile, And sink down like the Nile of Egypt.
6 ‘The one who builds his stairs in the heavens And establishes his structure over the earth; The one who summons the waters of the sea, To pour them out on the surface of the earth —Jehovah is his name.’
7 ‘Are you not like the sons of the Cushʹites to me, O people of Israel?’ declares Jehovah. ‘Did I not bring Israel up out of the land of Egypt, The Phi·lisʹtines out of Crete, and Syria out of Kir?’
8 ‘Look! The eyes of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah are on the sinful kingdom, And he will annihilate it from the surface of the land. But I will not completely annihilate the house of Jacob,’ declares Jehovah.
9 ‘For look! I am giving the command, And I will shake the house of Israel among all the nations, Just as one shakes a sieve, And not a pebble falls to the ground.
10 They will die by the sword, all the sinners of my people, Those who are saying, “The calamity will not come near us or reach us.”’
11 ‘In that day I will raise up the booth of David that is fallen, I will repair the breaches, And I will restore its ruins; I will rebuild it as in the days of long ago,
12 So that they may take possession of what is remaining of Eʹdom, And all the nations on whom my name has been called,’ declares Jehovah, who is doing this.
13 ‘Look! The days are coming,’ declares Jehovah, ‘When the plowman will overtake the harvester, And the treader of grapes, the one carrying seed; And the mountains will drip with sweet wine, And all the hills will flow with it.
14 I will gather back the captives of my people Israel, And they will rebuild the desolated cities and inhabit them; They will plant vineyards and drink their wine, And make gardens and eat their fruit.’
15 ‘I will plant them on their land, And they will never again be uprooted From their land that I have given them,’ says Jehovah your God.”
1 The vision of O·ba·diʹah: This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says regarding Eʹdom: “We have heard a report from Jehovah, An envoy has been sent among the nations: ‘Rise up, let us prepare for battle against her.’”
2 “Look! I have made you insignificant among the nations; You are utterly despised.
3 The presumptuousness of your heart has deceived you, You who reside in the retreats of the crag, Dwelling in the height, saying in your heart, ‘Who will bring me down to the earth?’
4 Even if you make your dwelling high like the eagle, Or if you place your nest among the stars, I would bring you down from there,” declares Jehovah.
5 “If thieves would come to you, robbers by night, (How utterly you will be destroyed!) Would they not steal only what they wanted? Or if it were grape gatherers who would come to you, Would they not leave some gleanings behind?
6 O how Eʹsau has been searched out! How his hidden treasures have been sought after!
7 They have driven you to the border. All your allies have deceived you. The men at peace with you have prevailed against you. Those eating bread with you will place a net under you, But you will not discern it.
8 In that day,” declares Jehovah, “Will I not destroy the wise ones out of Eʹdom And discernment out of the mountainous region of Eʹsau?
9 And your warriors will become terrified, O Teʹman, Because each one in the mountainous region of Eʹsau will be destroyed in the slaughter.
10 Because of the violence done to your brother Jacob, Shame will cover you, And you will perish forever.
11 On the day when you stood off to the side, On the day when strangers took his army into captivity, When foreigners entered his gate and cast lots over Jerusalem, You acted like one of them.
12 You should not gloat over your brother’s day on the day of his misfortune, You should not rejoice over the people of Judah on the day of their perishing, And you should not speak so arrogantly on the day of their distress.
13 You should not come into the gate of my people in the day of their disaster, You should not gloat over his calamity in the day of his disaster, And you should not lay your hands on his wealth in the day of his disaster.
14 You should not stand at the crossroads to slaughter his escapees, And you should not hand over his survivors in the day of distress.
15 For the day of Jehovah against all the nations is near. As you have done, so it will be done to you. The way you treated others will come back on your own head.
16 For in the way that you have drunk on my holy mountain, All the nations will keep drinking constantly. They will drink and gulp down, And they will be as though they had never existed.
17 But on Mount Zion will be those who escape, And it will be holy; And the house of Jacob will take possession of the things belonging to them.
18 The house of Jacob will become a fire, The house of Joseph a flame, And the house of Eʹsau like stubble; They will set them ablaze and consume them, And there will be no survivor of the house of Eʹsau, For Jehovah himself has spoken.
19 They will take possession of the Negʹeb and the mountainous region of Eʹsau, Of the She·pheʹlah and the land of the Phi·lisʹtines. They will take possession of the field of Eʹphra·im and the field of Sa·marʹi·a, And Benjamin will take possession of Gilʹe·ad.
20 To the exiles of this rampart, To the people of Israel will belong the land of the Caʹnaan·ites as far as Zarʹe·phath. And the exiles of Jerusalem, who were in Se·pharʹad, will possess the cities of the Negʹeb.
21 And saviors will go up on Mount Zion To judge the mountainous region of Eʹsau, And the kingship will become Jehovah’s.”
1 The word of Jehovah came to Joʹnah the son of A·mitʹtai, saying:
2 “Get up, go to Ninʹe·veh the great city, and proclaim judgment against her, for their wickedness has come to my attention.”
3 But Joʹnah got up to run away from Jehovah to Tarʹshish; he went down to Jopʹpa and found a ship going to Tarʹshish. So he paid the fare and went aboard to go with them to Tarʹshish, away from Jehovah.
4 Then Jehovah hurled a strong wind at the sea, and there was such a violent storm on the sea that the ship was about to be wrecked.
5 The mariners were so frightened that each of them began to call on his god for help. And they began throwing the articles of the ship into the sea, to make it lighter. But Joʹnah had gone down into the inner part of the ship, where he lay down and fell fast asleep.
6 The ship captain approached and said to him: “Why are you sleeping? Get up, call out to your god! Perhaps the true God will show his concern for us, and we will not perish.”
7 Then they said to one another: “Come, let us cast lots to find out who is to blame for this calamity.” So they cast lots, and the lot fell to Joʹnah.
8 They said to him: “Please tell us, who is to blame for this calamity that has come upon us? What is your work, and where do you come from? What is your country, and from what people are you?”
9 He replied: “I am a Hebrew, and I fear Jehovah the God of the heavens, the One who made the sea and the dry land.”
10 At this the men became even more afraid, and they asked him: “What have you done?” (The men learned that he was running away from Jehovah, because he had told them.)
11 So they said to him: “What should we do to you to make the sea calm down for us?” For the sea was growing more and more stormy.
12 He replied: “Lift me up and throw me into the sea, and the sea will calm down for you; for I know that it is because of me that this violent storm has come upon you.”
13 However, the men rowed hard to bring the ship back to dry land, but they could not, because the sea grew more and more stormy around them.
14 Then they called out to Jehovah and said: “Ah, now, O Jehovah, please, may we not perish because of this man! Do not hold us responsible for innocent blood, since you have done as you pleased, O Jehovah.”
15 Then they lifted Joʹnah up and threw him into the sea; and the sea ceased its raging.
16 Then the men were struck with great fear of Jehovah, and they offered a sacrifice to Jehovah and made vows.
17 Jehovah now sent a huge fish to swallow Joʹnah, so that Joʹnah came to be in the belly of the fish for three days and three nights.
2 Then Joʹnah prayed to Jehovah his God from the belly of the fish,
2 and he said: “Out of my distress I called out to Jehovah, and he answered me. Out of the depths of the Grave I cried for help. You heard my voice.
3 When you threw me to the depths, into the heart of the open sea, Then the currents engulfed me. All your breakers and waves swept over me.
4 And I said, ‘I have been driven away from your sight! How will I gaze again upon your holy temple?’
5 Waters engulfed me and threatened my life; The watery deep closed in on me. Weeds were wrapped around my head.
6 To the bottoms of the mountains I sank down. The bars of the earth were closing upon me forever. But out of the pit you brought up my life, O Jehovah my God.
7 When my life was ebbing away, Jehovah was the One whom I remembered. Then my prayer came in to you, into your holy temple.
8 Those who are devoted to the worthless idols forsake their source of loyal love.
9 But as for me, with the voice of thanksgiving I will sacrifice to you. What I have vowed, I will pay. Salvation is from Jehovah.”
10 In time Jehovah commanded the fish, and it vomited Joʹnah out onto the dry land.
3 Then the word of Jehovah came to Joʹnah a second time, saying:
2 “Get up, go to Ninʹe·veh the great city, and proclaim to her the message that I tell you.”
3 So Joʹnah got up and went to Ninʹe·veh in obedience to the word of Jehovah. Now Ninʹe·veh was a very large city—a walking distance of three days.
4 Then Joʹnah entered the city, and walking a day’s journey, he was proclaiming: “In just 40 days more, Ninʹe·veh will be overthrown.”
5 And the men of Ninʹe·veh put faith in God, and they proclaimed a fast and put on sackcloth, from the greatest to the least of them.
6 When the message reached the king of Ninʹe·veh, he rose up from his throne and took off his royal garment and covered himself with sackcloth and sat down in the ashes.
7 Furthermore, he issued a proclamation throughout Ninʹe·veh, “By the decree of the king and his nobles: No man or beast, herd or flock, should eat anything at all. They should not take food, nor should they drink any water.
8 Let them be covered with sackcloth, both man and beast; and let them call out earnestly to God and turn from their evil ways and from the violence they practice.
9 Who knows whether the true God may reconsider what he intends to do and turn from his burning anger, so that we may not perish?”
10 When the true God saw what they did, how they had turned back from their evil ways, he reconsidered the calamity that he said he would bring on them, and he did not bring it.
4 But this was highly displeasing to Joʹnah, and he became hot with anger.
2 So he prayed to Jehovah: “Ah, now, Jehovah, was this not my concern when I was in my own land? That is why I tried to flee to Tarʹshish in the first place; for I knew that you are a compassionate and merciful God, slow to anger and abundant in loyal love, one who feels grieved over calamity.
3 Now, O Jehovah, please take away my life, for it is better for me to die than to live.”
4 Jehovah asked: “Is it right for you to be so angry?”
5 Joʹnah then went out of the city and sat down east of the city. He made a shelter for himself there and sat in its shade to see what would happen to the city.
6 Jehovah God then provided a bottle-gourd plant to grow up over Joʹnah, to give him shade for his head and to relieve his misery. And Joʹnah was very pleased with the bottle-gourd plant.
7 But the true God sent a worm at the break of dawn on the next day, and it attacked the bottle-gourd plant, and it withered.
8 When the sun began to shine, God also sent a scorching east wind, and the sun beat down on Joʹnah’s head, and he grew faint. He kept asking to die, and he kept saying, “It is better for me to die than to live.”
9 God asked Joʹnah: “Is it right for you to be so angry over the bottle-gourd plant?” At that he said: “I have a right to be angry, so angry that I want to die.”
10 But Jehovah said: “You felt sorry for the bottle-gourd plant, which you did not work for, nor did you make it grow; it grew in one night and perished in one night.
11 Should I not also feel sorry for Ninʹe·veh the great city, in which there are more than 120,000 men who do not even know right from wrong, as well as their many animals?”
1 The word of Jehovah that came to Miʹcah of Moʹresh·eth, in the days of Joʹtham, Aʹhaz, and Hez·e·kiʹah, kings of Judah, and that he received in a vision concerning Sa·marʹi·a and Jerusalem:
2 “Hear, all you peoples! Pay attention, O earth and what fills you, And let the Sovereign Lord Jehovah serve as a witness against you —Jehovah from his holy temple.
3 For look! Jehovah is going out from his place; He will come down and tread on earth’s high places.
4 The mountains will melt under him, And the valleys will split apart Like wax before the fire, Like waters poured down a steep slope.
5 All of this is because of the revolt of Jacob, Because of the sins of the house of Israel. What is the revolt of Jacob? Is it not Sa·marʹi·a? And what are the high places of Judah? Are they not Jerusalem?
6 I will make Sa·marʹi·a a heap of ruins of the field, A place for planting vineyards; I will hurl her stones down into the valley, And I will lay bare her foundations.
7 All her graven images will be crushed to pieces, And all the gifts for which she hired herself out will be burned in the fire. I will devastate all her idols. For she collected them from the wages of prostitution, And they will again become the wages of prostitutes.”
8 Because of this I will wail and howl; I will walk barefoot and naked. My wailing will be like that of jackals, And my mourning like that of ostriches.
9 For her wound cannot be healed; It has come as far as Judah. The plague has spread to the gate of my people, to Jerusalem.
10 “Do not announce it in Gath; You must not weep at all. In Beth-aphʹrah roll in the dust.
11 Cross over in nakedness and shame, O inhabitants of Shaʹphir. The inhabitants of Zaʹa·nan have not come out. There will be wailing in Beth-eʹzel, and it will take its support away from you.
12 For the inhabitants of Maʹroth have waited for good, But what is bad has come down from Jehovah to the gate of Jerusalem.
13 Harness the chariot to the team of horses, O inhabitants of Laʹchish. You were the beginning of sin to the daughter of Zion, For in you were found the revolts of Israel.
14 So you will give parting gifts to Moʹresh·eth-gath. The houses of Achʹzib were something deceitful to the kings of Israel.
15 The conqueror I will yet bring in to you, O inhabitants of Ma·reʹshah. As far as A·dulʹlam the glory of Israel will come.
16 Make yourselves bald and shear off your hair for your cherished children. Make yourselves as bald as an eagle, For they have been taken away from you into exile.”
2 “Woe to those who scheme what is harmful, Who work out evil on their beds! When morning light comes they carry it out, Because it is in the power of their hand.
2 They desire fields and seize them; Also houses, and they take them; They defraud a man of his house, A man of his inheritance.
3 Therefore this is what Jehovah says: ‘Here I am devising against this family a calamity from which you will not escape. You will no longer walk haughtily, for it is a time of calamity.
4 In that day people will recite a proverb concerning you, And they will bitterly lament over you. They will say: “We are completely devastated! He caused the portion of my people to change hands—how he removes it from me! To the unfaithful one he assigns our fields.”
5 So you will have no one to stretch the measuring cord, To allot the land in the congregation of Jehovah.
6 “Stop preaching!” they preach, “They should not preach these things; Humiliation will not overtake us!”
7 Is it being said, O house of Jacob: “Has the spirit of Jehovah become impatient? Are these his deeds?” Do not my own words bring good to those walking uprightly?
8 But lately my own people have risen up as an enemy. You openly strip off the majestic ornament with the garment From those passing by confidently, like those returning from war.
9 You drive the women of my people out from their delightful houses; From their children you take away my splendor forever.
10 Get up and go, for this is no place of rest. Because of uncleanness, there is destruction, grievous destruction.
11 If a man walks after wind and deception and tells this lie: “I will preach to you about wine and alcoholic drink,” Then he would be just the preacher for this people!
12 I will certainly gather all of you, O Jacob; I will surely collect the remaining ones of Israel together. In unity I will place them, like sheep in the pen, Like a flock in its pasture; It will be noisy with people.’
13 The one breaking out will go before them; They will break out and pass through the gate and go out by it. Their king will pass through before them, With Jehovah at their head.”
3 I said: “Hear, please, you heads of Jacob And you commanders of the house of Israel. Should you not know what is just?
2 But you hate what is good and love what is bad; You tear off the skin from my people and the flesh from their bones.
3 You also eat the flesh of my people And strip off their skin, Smashing their bones, crushing them to pieces, Like what is cooked in a pot, like meat in a cooking pot.
4 At that time they will call to Jehovah for help, But he will not answer them. He will hide his face from them at that time, Because of their wicked deeds.
5 This is what Jehovah says against the prophets who are leading my people astray, Who proclaim ‘Peace!’ while they bite with their teeth But who declare war against him who puts nothing into their mouths:
6 ‘You will have night; there will be no vision; There will only be darkness for you, no divination. The sun will set on the prophets, And the day will turn dark for them.
7 The visionaries will be put to shame, And the diviners will be disappointed. All of them will have to cover over the mustache, For there is no answer from God.’”
8 As for me, I am filled with power by the spirit of Jehovah, And with justice and might, To tell to Jacob his revolt and to Israel his sin.
9 Hear this, please, you heads of the house of Jacob And you commanders of the house of Israel, Who detest justice and who make crooked all that is straight,
10 Who build Zion with bloodshed and Jerusalem with unrighteousness.
11 Her leaders judge for a bribe, Her priests instruct for a price, And her prophets practice divination for money. And yet they lean on Jehovah, saying: “Is not Jehovah with us? No calamity will come upon us.”
12 So because of you, Zion will be plowed up as a field, Jerusalem will become heaps of ruins, And the mountain of the House will become like high places in a forest.
4 In the final part of the days, The mountain of the house of Jehovah Will become firmly established above the top of the mountains, And it will be raised up above the hills, And to it peoples will stream.
2 And many nations will go and say: “Come, let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah And to the house of the God of Jacob. He will instruct us about his ways, And we will walk in his paths.” For law will go out of Zion, And the word of Jehovah out of Jerusalem.
3 He will render judgment among many peoples And set matters straight respecting mighty nations far away. They will beat their swords into plowshares And their spears into pruning shears. Nation will not lift up sword against nation, Nor will they learn war anymore.
4 They will sit, each one under his vine and under his fig tree, And no one will make them afraid, For the mouth of Jehovah of armies has spoken.
5 For all the peoples will walk, each in the name of its god, But we will walk in the name of Jehovah our God forever and ever.
6 “In that day,” declares Jehovah, “I will gather the one who was limping, And collect together the dispersed one, Along with those I treated harshly.
7 I will make the one who was limping a remnant, And the one far removed a mighty nation; And Jehovah will rule as king over them in Mount Zion, From now on and forever.
8 As for you, O tower of the flock, The mound of the daughter of Zion, To you it will come, yes, the first dominion will come, The kingdom belonging to the daughter of Jerusalem.
9 Now why are you shouting loudly? Have you no king, Or has your adviser perished, So that pain has seized you like a woman giving birth?
10 Writhe and groan, O daughter of Zion, Like a woman giving birth, For now you will go from the city and reside in the field. You will go as far as to Babylon, And there you will be rescued; There Jehovah will buy you back from the hand of your enemies.
11 Now many nations will be gathered against you; They will say, ‘Let her be defiled, And let our eyes see this happen to Zion.’
12 But they do not know the thoughts of Jehovah, They do not understand his purpose; For he will gather them like a row of newly cut grain to the threshing floor.
13 Get up and thresh, O daughter of Zion; For I will change your horns into iron, And I will change your hooves into copper, And you will pulverize many peoples. You will devote their dishonest profit to Jehovah, And their resources to the true Lord of the whole earth.”
5 “Now you are slashing yourself, O daughter under attack; A siege is laid against us. With a rod they strike the judge of Israel on the cheek.
2 And you, O Bethʹle·hem Ephʹra·thah, The one too little to be among the thousands of Judah, From you will come out for me the one to be ruler in Israel, Whose origin is from ancient times, from the days of long ago.
3 So he will give them up Until the time that she who is to give birth has given birth. And the rest of his brothers will return to the people of Israel.
4 He will stand up and shepherd in the strength of Jehovah, In the superiority of the name of Jehovah his God. And they will dwell in security, For now his greatness will reach the ends of the earth.
5 And he will bring peace. Should the As·syrʹi·an invade our land and tread on our fortified towers, We will raise up against him seven shepherds, yes, eight princes of mankind.
6 They will shepherd the land of As·syrʹi·a with the sword, And the land of Nimʹrod at its entrances. And he will rescue us from the As·syrʹi·an, When he invades our land and treads on our territory.
7 The remaining ones of Jacob will be in the midst of many peoples Like dew from Jehovah, Like showers of rain on vegetation That do not put hope in man Or wait for the sons of men.
8 The remaining ones of Jacob will be among the nations, In the midst of many peoples, Like a lion among the beasts of a forest, Like a young lion among flocks of sheep, That passes through and pounces and tears in pieces; And there is no one to rescue them.
9 Your hand will be raised over your adversaries, And all your enemies will be destroyed.”
10 “In that day,” declares Jehovah, “I will do away with your horses from your midst and destroy your chariots.
11 I will destroy the cities of your land And tear down all your fortified places.
12 I will put an end to the sorcery you practice, And no one practicing magic will remain among you.
13 I will destroy your graven images and your pillars from your midst, And you will no longer bow down to the work of your hands.
14 I will uproot your sacred poles from your midst And annihilate your cities.
15 In anger and wrath I will execute vengeance On the nations that have not obeyed.”
6 Hear, please, what Jehovah is saying. Get up, present a legal case before the mountains, And may the hills hear your voice.
2 Hear, O mountains, the legal case of Jehovah, You firm foundations of the earth, For Jehovah has a legal case with his people; It is against Israel that he will argue:
3 “My people, what have I done to you? How have I tired you out? Testify against me.
4 For I brought you up out of the land of Egypt, From the house of slavery I redeemed you; I sent before you Moses, Aaron, and Mirʹi·am.
5 My people, remember, please, what King Baʹlak of Moʹab proposed, And what Baʹlaam the son of Beʹor answered him —What took place from Shitʹtim to Gilʹgal— So that you may know the righteous acts of Jehovah.”
6 With what will I come before Jehovah? With what will I bow before God on high? Will I come before him with whole burnt offerings, With year-old calves?
7 Will Jehovah be pleased with thousands of rams, With tens of thousands of torrents of oil? Will I give my firstborn son for my revolt, The fruit of my body for my sin?
8 He has told you, O man, what is good. And what is Jehovah requiring of you? Only to exercise justice, to cherish loyalty, And to walk in modesty with your God!
9 The voice of Jehovah calls out to the city; Those with practical wisdom will fear your name. Pay attention to the rod and to the one who appointed it.
10 Are there still the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked And the incomplete eʹphah measure that is detestable?
11 Can I be morally clean with wicked scales, With a bag of fraudulent stone weights?
12 For her rich men are full of violence, And her inhabitants speak lies; Their tongue is deceitful in their mouth.
13 “Therefore, I will wound you by striking you, Making you desolate because of your sins.
14 You will eat but not be satisfied; You will be empty inside. What you remove, you will not carry off safely, And what you do carry off, I will give to the sword.
15 You will sow seed, but you will not reap. You will tread olives, but you will not use the oil; And you will make new wine, but you will drink no wine.
16 For you observe the statutes of Omʹri and all the work of the house of Aʹhab, And you walk in accord with their advice. That is why I will make you an object of horror And her inhabitants something to be whistled at; And you will bear the scorn of the peoples.”
7 Woe to me! I am like one who, After the gathering of summer fruit And the gleaning following a grape harvest, Finds no cluster of grapes to eat, No early fig that I crave.
2 The loyal one has perished from the earth; Among men there is no one upright. All of them lie in ambush for bloodshed. Each hunts his own brother with a dragnet.
3 Their hands are expert at doing what is bad; The prince is making demands, The judge asks for a reward, The prominent one makes known his desires, And they work it out together.
4 Their best one is like thorns, Their most upright one is worse than a thorn hedge. The day of your watchmen and of your reckoning will come. Now they will panic.
5 Do not put faith in your companion Or trust a close friend. Guard what you say to the one who lies in your embrace.
6 For a son despises his father, A daughter rises up against her mother, And a daughter-in-law is against her mother-in-law; A man’s enemies are the men of his household.
7 But as for me, I will keep on the lookout for Jehovah. I will show a waiting attitude for the God of my salvation. My God will hear me.
8 Do not rejoice over me, O my enemy. Although I have fallen, I will rise up; Although I dwell in the darkness, Jehovah will be my light.
9 The wrath of Jehovah I will bear —For I have sinned against him— Until he pleads my legal case and brings about justice for me. He will bring me out to the light; I will look upon his righteousness.
10 My enemy will also see, And shame will cover her who said to me: “Where is Jehovah your God?” My eyes will look upon her. Now she will be trampled like mud in the streets.
11 It will be a day for building your stone walls; On that day the boundary will be extended.
12 On that day they will come to you All the way from As·syrʹi·a and the cities of Egypt, From Egypt all the way to the River; From sea to sea and from mountain to mountain.
13 And the land will become desolate because of its inhabitants, As a result of what they have done.
14 Shepherd your people with your staff, the flock of your inheritance, The one who was living alone in a forest—in the midst of an orchard. Let them feed on Baʹshan and Gilʹe·ad as in the days of old.
15 “As in the days when you came out of the land of Egypt, I will show him wonderful things.
16 Nations will see and be ashamed despite all their might. They will put their hand over their mouth; Their ears will become deaf.
17 They will lick the dust like serpents; Like the reptiles of the earth they will come trembling out of their strongholds. To Jehovah our God they will come in dread, And they will be in fear of you.”
18 Who is a God like you, Pardoning error and passing over the transgression of the remnant of his inheritance? He will not hold onto his anger forever, For he delights in loyal love.
19 He will again show us mercy; he will conquer our errors. You will throw all their sins into the depths of the sea.
20 You will show faithfulness to Jacob, Loyal love to Abraham, As you swore to our forefathers from the days of old.
1 A pronouncement against Ninʹe·veh: The book of the vision of Naʹhum the Elʹkosh·ite:
2 Jehovah is a God who requires exclusive devotion and takes vengeance; Jehovah takes vengeance and is ready to express his wrath. Jehovah takes vengeance against his foes, And he stores up wrath for his enemies.
3 Jehovah is slow to anger and great in power, But by no means will Jehovah hold back due punishment. His path is in destructive wind and storm, And the clouds are the dust of his feet.
4 He rebukes the sea, and he dries it up; And he makes all the rivers run dry. Baʹshan and Carʹmel wither, And the blossoms of Lebʹa·non wither.
5 Mountains quake because of him, And the hills melt. The earth will be in an upheaval because of his face, Along with the land and all those dwelling in it.
6 Who can stand before his indignation? And who can withstand the heat of his anger? His wrath will be poured out like fire, And the rocks will be shattered because of him.
7 Jehovah is good, a stronghold in the day of distress. He is mindful of those seeking refuge in him.
8 With a sweeping flood he will make a complete extermination of her place, And darkness will pursue his enemies.
9 What will you plot against Jehovah? He is causing a complete extermination. Distress will not arise a second time.
10 For they are interwoven like thorns, And they are like those drunk with beer; But they will be consumed like dry stubble.
11 From you will come one who plots evil against Jehovah, Giving worthless advice.
12 This is what Jehovah says: “Though they were at full strength and numerous, Even so they will be cut down and will pass away. I have afflicted you, but I will afflict you no more.
13 And now I will break his yoke bar from off you, And I will tear your bonds in two.
14 Jehovah has commanded concerning you, ‘Your name will not be perpetuated further. I will do away with the carved images and metal statues from the house of your gods. I will make a grave for you, because you are contemptible.’
15 Look! On the mountains are the feet of one bringing good news, The one proclaiming peace. Celebrate your festivals, O Judah, pay your vows, For the worthless one will never pass through you again. He will be utterly destroyed.”
2 One who scatters has come up against you. Guard the fortifications. Keep watch over the road. Brace yourselves and muster all your strength.
2 For Jehovah will restore the pride of Jacob, Along with the pride of Israel, For the devastators have devastated them; And they have ruined their shoots.
3 The shields of his mighty men are dyed red, His warriors are dressed in crimson. The iron fittings of his war chariots flash like fire In the day he prepares for battle, And the juniper spears are brandished.
4 The war chariots race madly through the streets. They rush up and down the public squares. They shine like burning torches and flash like lightning.
5 He will summon his officers. They will stumble as they advance. They rush to her wall; They set up the barricade.
6 The gates of the rivers will be opened, And the palace will be dissolved.
7 It has been decreed: She is exposed, She is carried away, and her slave girls moan; They sound like doves as they beat their breasts.
8 Throughout her days Ninʹe·veh was like a pool of waters, But now they are fleeing. “Stand still! Stand still!” But no one is turning back.
9 Plunder silver, plunder gold! There is no end to the treasures. It is stocked with all sorts of precious things.
10 The city is empty, desolate, devastated! Their hearts melt in fear, their knees buckle, their hips tremble; All their faces are flushed.
11 Where is the lair of lions, where the young lions feed, Where the lion goes out leading its cub, With no one to make them afraid?
12 The lion tore apart enough prey for his cubs And strangled for his lionesses. He kept his dens filled with prey, His lairs with torn animals.
13 “Look! I am against you,” declares Jehovah of armies, “I will burn up her war chariots in smoke, And the sword will devour your young lions. I will cut off your prey from the earth, And the sound of your messengers will be heard no more.”
3 Woe to the city of bloodshed! She is completely full of deception and robbery. She is never without prey!
2 There is the crack of the whip and the rattle of wheels, The dashing horse and the bounding chariot.
3 The mounted horseman, the flashing sword, and the glittering spear, The multitude of the slain and the heaps of carcasses —There is no end to the dead bodies. They keep stumbling over the dead bodies.
4 This is because of the many acts of prostitution of the prostitute, She who is attractive and charming, a mistress of sorceries, Who ensnares nations by her prostitution and families by her sorceries.
5 “Look! I am against you,” declares Jehovah of armies, “I will lift your skirts up over your face; I will cause nations to see your nakedness, And kingdoms your disgrace.
6 And I will throw filth on you And make you despicable; I will make a spectacle of you.
7 Everyone who sees you will flee from you and say, ‘Ninʹe·veh has been devastated! Who will sympathize with her?’ Where will I find comforters for you?
8 Are you better than No-aʹmon, which sat by the Nile canals? Waters surrounded her; Her wealth was the sea and her wall was the sea.
9 E·thi·oʹpi·a was her source of boundless strength, also Egypt. Put and the Libʹy·ans were your helpers.
10 But even she became an exile; She went into captivity. Her children also were dashed to pieces on every street corner. They cast lots over her honored men, And all her great men have been bound with fetters.
11 You will also become drunk; You will go into hiding. You will seek refuge from the enemy.
12 All your fortifications are like fig trees with the first ripe fruits; If they are shaken, they will fall into the mouth of devourers.
13 Look! Your troops are like women in your midst. The gates of your land will be wide open for your enemies. Fire will consume the bars of your gates.
14 Draw water for the siege! Strengthen your fortifications. Go down into the mire and tread the clay; Grab hold of the brick mold.
15 Even there fire will consume you. A sword will cut you down. It will devour you as the young locusts do. Make yourself as numerous as the young locusts! Yes, make yourself as numerous as the locusts!
16 You have multiplied your merchants more than the stars of the heavens. The young locust strips off its skin and flies away.
17 Your guards are like the locust, And your officers like a locust swarm. They camp in the stone pens on a cold day, But when the sun shines, they fly away; And no one knows where they are.
18 Your shepherds are drowsy, O king of As·syrʹi·a; Your nobles stay in their residences. Your people are scattered on the mountains, And no one is gathering them together.
19 There is no relief for your catastrophe. Your wound is beyond healing. All those hearing the report about you will clap their hands; For who has not suffered from your relentless cruelty?”
1 A pronouncement that Ha·bakʹkuk the prophet received in a vision:
2 How long, O Jehovah, must I cry for help, but you do not hear? How long must I ask for help from violence, but you do not intervene?
3 Why do you make me witness wrongdoing? And why do you tolerate oppression? Why are destruction and violence before me? And why do quarreling and conflict abound?
4 So law is paralyzed, And justice is never carried out. For the wicked surround the righteous; That is why justice is perverted.
5 “Look among the nations and pay attention! Stare in amazement and be astounded; For something will happen in your days That you will not believe even if it is told to you.
6 For here I am raising up the Chal·deʹans, The ruthless and impetuous nation. They sweep through vast stretches of the earth To seize homes not theirs.
7 They are frightening and fearsome. They establish their own justice and authority.
8 Their horses are swifter than leopards, And they are fiercer than wolves in the night. Their warhorses gallop forward; Their horses come from far away. They swoop down like the eagle rushing to feed.
9 All of them come bent on violence. The assembling of their faces is like the east wind, And they scoop up captives like sand.
10 They scoff at kings And laugh at high officials. They laugh at every fortified place; They pile up a dirt ramp and capture it.
11 Then they move forward like the wind and pass through, But they will become guilty, Because they credit their power to their god.”
12 Are you not from everlasting, O Jehovah? O my God, my Holy One, you do not die. O Jehovah, you appointed them to execute judgment; My Rock, you established them for punishment.
13 Your eyes are too pure to look on what is evil, And you cannot tolerate wickedness. Why, then, do you tolerate the treacherous And keep silent when a wicked man swallows up someone more righteous than he is?
14 Why do you make man like the fish of the sea, Like creeping things that have no ruler?
15 All of these he hauls up with a fishhook. He catches them in his dragnet, And he gathers them in his fishing net. That is why he rejoices greatly.
16 That is why he offers sacrifices to his dragnet And makes sacrifices to his fishing net; For by them his portion is rich, And his food is choice.
17 Will he then keep emptying out his dragnet? Will he go on slaughtering nations without compassion?
2 At my guardpost I will keep standing, And I will station myself on the rampart. I will keep watch to see what he will speak by means of me And what I will reply when I am reproved.
2 Jehovah then answered me: “Write down the vision, and inscribe it clearly on tablets, So that the one reading aloud from it may do so easily.
3 For the vision is yet for its appointed time, And it is rushing toward its end, and it will not lie. Even if it should delay, keep in expectation of it! For it will without fail come true. It will not be late!
4 Look at the one who is proud; He is not upright within himself. But the righteous one will live by his faithfulness.
5 Indeed, because the wine is treacherous, The arrogant man will not reach his goal. He makes his appetite as large as the Grave; He is like death and cannot be satisfied. He keeps gathering all the nations And collecting for himself all the peoples.
6 Will not all of these speak a proverb, an allusion, and riddles against him? They will say: ‘Woe to him who accumulates what is not his —For how long?— And who makes even greater his own debt!
7 Will not your creditors rise up suddenly? They will wake up and violently shake you, And you will become something for them to plunder.
8 Because you plundered many nations, All the rest of the peoples will plunder you, Because of your shedding men’s blood And your violence to the earth, To the cities and those living in them.
9 Woe to the one who makes evil gain for his house, So as to set his nest on the height, To escape the grasp of calamity!
10 You have plotted shame against your house. By wiping out many peoples you sin against yourself.
11 For a stone will cry out from the wall, And from the woodwork a rafter will answer it.
12 Woe to the one who builds a city by bloodshed, And who establishes a town by unrighteousness!
13 Look! Is it not from Jehovah of armies that peoples will work hard to feed the fire, And that nations tire themselves out for nothing?
14 For the earth will be filled with the knowledge of the glory of Jehovah As the waters cover the sea.
15 Woe to the one who gives his companions something to drink, Adding to it rage and anger, to make them drunk, In order to look on their nakedness!
16 You will be glutted with dishonor rather than glory. You too—drink and expose your uncircumcised condition. The cup in the right hand of Jehovah will come around to you, And disgrace will cover over your glory;
17 For the violence done to Lebʹa·non will cover you, And the destruction that terrified the beasts will come upon you, Because of your shedding men’s blood And your violence to the earth, To the cities and those living in them.
18 Of what benefit is a carved image When its maker has carved it? Of what benefit is a metal statue and a teacher of lies, Even though its maker trusts in it, Making worthless gods that are speechless?
19 Woe to the one who says to a piece of wood, “Awake!” Or to a speechless stone, “Wake up! Instruct us!” Look! It is overlaid in gold and silver, And there is no breath at all within it.
20 But Jehovah is in his holy temple. Be silent before him, all the earth!’”
3 The prayer of Ha·bakʹkuk the prophet, in dirges:
2 O Jehovah, I have heard the report about you. I am in awe, O Jehovah, of your activity. In the midst of the years bring it to life! In the midst of the years make it known. May you remember to show mercy during the turmoil.
3 God came from Teʹman, The Holy One from Mount Paʹran. (Selah) His majesty covered the heavens; With his praise the earth was filled.
4 His brightness was like the light. Two rays flashed from his hand, Where his strength was hidden.
5 Before him went pestilence, And burning fever followed at his feet.
6 He stood still and shook the earth. With a look, he made nations leap. The eternal mountains were smashed, And the ancient hills bowed down. The paths of long ago are his.
7 I saw trouble in the tents of Cuʹshan. The tent cloths of the land of Midʹi·an trembled.
8 Is it against the rivers, O Jehovah, Is it against the rivers that your anger is burning? Or is your fury against the sea? For you rode on your horses; Your chariots were victorious.
9 Your bow is uncovered and ready. The rods are assigned with an oath. (Selah) You split the earth with rivers.
10 Mountains writhed in pain at the sight of you. A downpour of waters swept through. The deep roared with its voice. It lifted its hands high.
11 Sun and moon stood still in their lofty abode. Your arrows went out like the light. The lightning of your spear was brilliant.
12 You marched through the earth with indignation. You trampled the nations in anger.
13 You went out for the salvation of your people, to save your anointed one. You crushed the leader of the house of the wicked. It was exposed from the foundation to the top. (Selah)
14 You pierced the head of his warriors with his own weapons When they stormed out to scatter me. They were overjoyed to devour an afflicted one in secret.
15 Through the sea you trod with your horses, Through the surging of vast waters.
16 I heard and I trembled within; At the sound my lips quivered. Rottenness entered my bones; My legs beneath me were shaking. But I quietly wait for the day of distress, For it is coming upon the people who attack us.
17 Although the fig tree may not blossom, And there may be no fruit on the vines; Although the olive crop may fail, And the fields may produce no food; Although the flock may disappear from the pen, And there may be no cattle in the stalls;
18 Yet, as for me, I will exult in Jehovah; I will be joyful in the God of my salvation.
19 The Sovereign Lord Jehovah is my strength; He will make my feet like those of a deer And cause me to tread on high places. To the director; with my stringed instruments.
1 The word of Jehovah that came to Zeph·a·niʹah son of Cushʹi son of Ged·a·liʹah son of Am·a·riʹah son of Hez·e·kiʹah in the days of Jo·siʹah son of Aʹmon the king of Judah:
2 “I will completely sweep away everything from the surface of the ground,” declares Jehovah.
3 “I will sweep away man and beast. I will sweep away the birds of the heavens and the fish of the sea, And the stumbling blocks along with the wicked ones; And I will remove mankind from the surface of the ground,” declares Jehovah.
4 “I will stretch out my hand against Judah And against all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, And I will wipe out from this place every vestige of Baʹal, The name of the foreign-god priests along with the priests,
5 And those who bow down on the rooftops to the army of the heavens, And those who bow down and pledge loyalty to Jehovah While pledging loyalty to Malʹcam;
6 And those who turn away from following Jehovah And who do not seek Jehovah or inquire of him.”
7 Be silent before the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, for the day of Jehovah is near. Jehovah has prepared a sacrifice; he has sanctified those he invited.
8 “On the day of Jehovah’s sacrifice I will call to account the princes, The sons of the king, and all those wearing foreign clothing.
9 I will call to account everyone who climbs onto the platform on that day, Those who fill their master’s house with violence and deception.
10 On that day,” declares Jehovah, “There will be the sound of an outcry from the Fish Gate, A wailing from the second quarter of the city, And a loud crash from the hills.
11 Wail, you inhabitants of Makʹtesh, For all the tradesmen have been done away with; All those weighing out silver have been destroyed.
12 At that time I will carefully search Jerusalem with lamps, And I will call to account the complacent ones, who say in their heart, ‘Jehovah will not do good, and he will not do bad.’
13 Their wealth will be plundered and their houses will be devastated. They will build houses, but they will not occupy them; And they will plant vineyards, but they will not drink wine from them.
14 The great day of Jehovah is near! It is near and it is approaching very quickly! The sound of the day of Jehovah is bitter. There a warrior cries out.
15 That day is a day of fury, A day of distress and anguish, A day of storm and desolation, A day of darkness and gloom, A day of clouds and thick gloom,
16 A day of the horn and of the battle cry, Against the fortified cities and against the high corner towers.
17 I will cause distress to mankind, And they will walk like blind men, Because it is against Jehovah they have sinned. Their blood will be poured out like dust, And their flesh like the dung.
18 Neither their silver nor their gold will be able to save them in the day of Jehovah’s fury; For by the fire of his zeal the whole earth will be consumed, Because he will make an extermination, indeed a terrible one, of all the inhabitants of the earth.”
2 Gather together, yes, gather yourselves, O nation that feels no shame.
2 Before the decree takes effect, Before the day passes by like chaff, Before the burning anger of Jehovah comes upon you, Before the day of Jehovah’s anger comes upon you,
3 Seek Jehovah, all you meek ones of the earth, Who observe his righteous decrees. Seek righteousness, seek meekness. Probably you will be concealed on the day of Jehovah’s anger.
4 For Gazʹa will be an abandoned city; And Ashʹke·lon will be desolated. Ashʹdod will be driven away in broad daylight, And Ekʹron will be uprooted.
5 “Woe to those who inhabit the seacoast, the nation of Cherʹe·thites! The word of Jehovah is against you. O Caʹnaan, land of the Phi·lisʹtines, I will destroy you, So that there will be no inhabitant left.
6 And the seacoast will become pasture grounds, With wells for shepherds and stone pens for sheep.
7 It will become a region for the remaining ones of the house of Judah; There they will feed. In the houses of Ashʹke·lon they will lie down in the evening. For Jehovah their God will turn his attention to them, And he will gather back their captives.”
8 “I have heard the reproach by Moʹab and the insults of the Amʹmon·ites, Who have taunted my people and made boasts against their territory.
9 Therefore as surely as I am alive,” declares Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, “Moʹab will become just like Sodʹom, And the Amʹmon·ites like Go·morʹrah, A place of nettles, a salt pit, and a permanent wasteland. The remaining ones of my people will plunder them, And the remnant of my nation will dispossess them.
10 This is what they will have instead of their pride, Because they taunted and exalted themselves against the people of Jehovah of armies.
11 Jehovah will be awe-inspiring against them; For he will bring to nothing all the gods of the earth, And all the islands of the nations will bow down to him, Each one from its place.
12 You E·thi·oʹpi·ans will also be slain by my sword.
13 He will stretch out his hand toward the north and destroy As·syrʹi·a, And he will make Ninʹe·veh desolate, as dry as a desert.
14 Herds will lie down within her, all sorts of wild animals. Both pelican and porcupine will spend the night among her pillar capitals. A voice will sing in the window. There will be devastation at the threshold; For he will expose the cedar panels.
15 This is the proud city that was sitting in security, That was saying in her heart, ‘I am the one, and there is nobody else.’ How she has become an object of horror, A place for the wild animals to lie down! Everyone passing by her will whistle and shake his fist.”
3 Woe to the rebellious, the polluted, the oppressive city!
2 She has obeyed no voice; she has accepted no discipline. In Jehovah she has not trusted; she has not drawn near to her God.
3 Her princes within her are roaring lions. Her judges are wolves in the night; They do not leave even a bone to gnaw until morning.
4 Her prophets are insolent, treacherous men. Her priests defile what is holy; They do violence to the law.
5 Jehovah is righteous in her midst; he does no wrong. Morning by morning he makes known his judgments, As unfailing as the daylight. But the unrighteous one knows no shame.
6 “I destroyed nations; their corner towers were left desolate. I devastated their streets, so that no one was passing through. Their cities were left in ruins, without a man, without an inhabitant.
7 I said, ‘Surely you will fear me and accept discipline,’ So that her dwelling place might not be destroyed —I must call her to account for all these things. But they were all the more eager to act corruptly.
8 ‘So keep yourselves in expectation of me,’ declares Jehovah, ‘Until the day when I rise up to take plunder, For my judicial decision is to gather nations, to assemble kingdoms, To pour out on them my indignation, all my burning anger; For by the fire of my zeal the whole earth will be consumed.
9 For then I will change the language of the peoples to a pure language, So that all of them may call on the name of Jehovah, To serve him shoulder to shoulder.’
10 From the region of the rivers of E·thi·oʹpi·a, Those entreating me, the daughter of my scattered ones, will bring a gift to me.
11 On that day you will not be put to shame Because of all your deeds with which you rebelled against me, For then I will remove the haughty boasters from among you; And you will never again be haughty in my holy mountain.
12 I will allow a humble and lowly people to remain in your midst, And they will take refuge in the name of Jehovah.
13 Those remaining of Israel will practice no unrighteousness; They will not speak a lie, nor will a deceitful tongue be found in their mouths; They will feed and lie down, and no one will make them afraid.”
14 Shout joyfully, O daughter of Zion! Shout in triumph, O Israel! Be joyful and rejoice with all your heart, O daughter of Jerusalem!
15 Jehovah has removed the judgments against you. He has turned away your enemy. The King of Israel, Jehovah, is in your midst. You will fear calamity no more.
16 On that day it will be said to Jerusalem: “Do not be afraid, O Zion. Do not let your hands drop down.
17 Jehovah your God is in your midst. As a mighty One, he will save. He will exult over you with great joy. He will become silent in his love. He will rejoice over you with shouts of joy.
18 I will gather together those grieving over their absence from your festivals; They were absent from you because of bearing reproach for her.
19 Look! At that time I will act against all those oppressing you; And I will save the one limping, And I will gather together the dispersed. I will make them an object of praise and fame In all the land of their shame.
20 At that time I will bring you in, At the time I gather you together. For I will make you an object of fame and praise among all the peoples of the earth, When I gather back your captives before your eyes,” says Jehovah.
1 In the second year of King Da·riʹus, in the sixth month, on the first day of the month, the word of Jehovah came through Hagʹgai the prophet to Ze·rubʹba·bel son of She·alʹti·el, the governor of Judah, and to Joshua son of Je·hozʹa·dak, the high priest, saying:
2 “This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘These people say, “The time has not yet come for the house of Jehovah to be built.”’”
3 And the word of Jehovah again came through Hagʹgai the prophet, saying:
4 “Is it the time for you to dwell in your paneled houses, while this house lies in ruins?
5 Now this is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Set your heart on your ways.
6 You have sown much seed, but you harvest little. You eat, but it is not to satisfaction. You drink, but you do not drink your fill. You put on clothing, but no one gets warm. The one who hires himself out puts his wages in a bag full of holes.’”
7 “This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Set your heart on your ways.’
8 “‘Go up to the mountain and bring in lumber. And build the house, so that I may take pleasure in it and I may be glorified,’ Jehovah says.”
9 “‘You were expecting much and receiving little; and when you brought it into the house, I blew it away. For what reason?’ declares Jehovah of armies. ‘Because my house is in ruins, while each of you runs around taking care of his own house.
10 So the heavens above you withheld their dew, and the earth withheld its produce.
11 And I kept calling for a drought on the earth, on the mountains, on the grain, on the new wine, on the oil, on what grows from the ground, on humans and livestock, and on all the labor of your hands.’”
12 Ze·rubʹba·bel son of She·alʹti·el and Joshua son of Je·hozʹa·dak, the high priest, and all the rest of the people listened to the voice of Jehovah their God and to the words of Hagʹgai the prophet, because Jehovah their God had sent him; and the people began to show fear because of Jehovah.
13 Then Hagʹgai, the messenger of Jehovah, gave this message to the people in harmony with his commission from Jehovah: “‘I am with you people,’ declares Jehovah.”
14 So Jehovah stirred up the spirit of Ze·rubʹba·bel the son of She·alʹti·el, the governor of Judah, and the spirit of Joshua the son of Je·hozʹa·dak, the high priest, and the spirit of all the rest of the people; and they came and began to work on the house of Jehovah of armies, their God.
15 This was on the 24th day of the sixth month in the second year of King Da·riʹus.
2 And I looked up and saw a man with a measuring line in his hand.
2 So I asked: “Where are you going?” He replied: “To measure Jerusalem, to see what is her width and what is her length.”
3 And look! the angel who was speaking with me went out, and another angel came to meet him.
4 Then he said to him: “Run over there and tell that young man, ‘“Jerusalem will be inhabited as open rural country, because of all the men and livestock within her.
5 And I will become to her,” declares Jehovah, “a wall of fire all around, and I will become the glory in her midst.”’”
6 “Come! Come! Flee from the land of the north,” declares Jehovah. “For I have scattered you to the four winds of the heavens,” declares Jehovah.
7 “Come, Zion! Make your escape, you who are dwelling with the daughter of Babylon.
8 For this is what Jehovah of armies says, who after being glorified has sent me to the nations that were plundering you: ‘Whoever touches you touches the pupil of my eye.
9 For now I will wave my hand against them, and they will become plunder for their own slaves.’ And you will certainly know that Jehovah of armies has sent me.
10 “Shout for joy, O daughter of Zion; for I am coming, and I will reside in your midst,” declares Jehovah.
11 “Many nations will join themselves to Jehovah in that day, and they will become my people; and I will reside in your midst.” And you will have to know that Jehovah of armies has sent me to you.
12 Jehovah will take possession of Judah as his portion on the holy ground, and he will again choose Jerusalem.
13 Be silent, all flesh, before Jehovah, for he is taking action from his holy dwelling.
3 And he showed me Joshua the high priest standing before the angel of Jehovah, and Satan was standing at his right hand to resist him.
2 Then the angel of Jehovah said to Satan: “May Jehovah rebuke you, O Satan, yes, may Jehovah, who has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke you! Is not this one a burning log snatched out of the fire?”
3 Now Joshua was clothed in filthy garments and standing before the angel.
4 The angel said to those standing before him, “Remove his filthy garments.” Then he said to him, “See, I have caused your error to pass away from you, and you will be clothed with fine garments.”
5 So I said: “Let a clean turban be put on his head.” And they put the clean turban on his head and clothed him with garments; and the angel of Jehovah was standing nearby.
6 The angel of Jehovah then declared to Joshua:
7 “This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘If you will walk in my ways and carry out your responsibilities before me, then you will serve as a judge in my house and take care of my courtyards; and I will give you free access among these who are standing here.’
8 “‘Hear, please, O High Priest Joshua, you and your companions who sit before you, for these men serve as a sign; look! I am bringing in my servant Sprout!
9 See the stone that I have set before Joshua! On the one stone are seven eyes; and I am engraving an inscription on it,’ declares Jehovah of armies, ‘and I will take away the guilt of that land in one day.’
10 “‘In that day,’ declares Jehovah of armies, ‘Each of you will invite your neighbor to come under your vine and under your fig tree.’”
4 The angel who had been speaking with me came back and woke me up, as when waking someone from sleep.
2 Then he said to me: “What do you see?” So I said: “I see, and look! a lampstand entirely of gold, with a bowl on top of it. There are seven lamps on it, yes, seven, and the lamps, which are at the top of it, have seven pipes.
3 And next to it are two olive trees, one on the right of the bowl and one on the left.”
4 Then I asked the angel who was speaking with me: “What do these things mean, my lord?”
5 So the angel who was speaking with me asked: “Do you not know what these things mean?” I replied: “No, my lord.”
6 He then said to me: “This is the word of Jehovah to Ze·rubʹba·bel: ‘“Not by a military force, nor by power, but by my spirit,” says Jehovah of armies.
7 Who are you, O great mountain? Before Ze·rubʹba·bel you will become a level land. And he will bring out the top stone amid shouts of: “How wonderful! How wonderful!”’”
8 The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
9 “The hands of Ze·rubʹba·bel have laid the foundation of this house, and his own hands will finish it. And you will have to know that Jehovah of armies has sent me to you.
10 For who has despised the day of small beginnings? For they will rejoice and see the plumb line in the hand of Ze·rubʹba·bel. These seven are the eyes of Jehovah, which are roving about in all the earth.”
11 Then I asked him: “What is the meaning of these two olive trees on the right and on the left of the lampstand?”
12 I asked him a second time: “What is the meaning of the two bunches of twigs of the olive trees that are pouring out the golden liquid through the two golden tubes?”
13 So he asked me: “Do you not know what these things mean?” I replied: “No, my lord.”
14 He said: “These are the two anointed ones who are standing alongside the Lord of the whole earth.”
6 Then I looked up again and saw four chariots coming from between two mountains, and the mountains were of copper.
2 The first chariot had red horses, and the second chariot, black horses.
3 The third chariot had white horses, and the fourth chariot, speckled and dappled horses.
4 I asked the angel who was speaking with me: “What are these, my lord?”
5 The angel answered me: “These are the four spirits of the heavens that are going out after having taken their station before the Lord of the whole earth.
6 The one with the black horses is going out to the land of the north; the white ones are going out beyond the sea; and the speckled ones are going out to the land of the south.
7 And the dappled ones were eager to go out to walk about through the earth.” Then he said: “Go, walk about through the earth.” And they began walking about through the earth.
8 He then called out to me and said: “See, those going out to the land of the north have caused the spirit of Jehovah to rest in the land of the north.”
9 The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
10 “Take from Helʹdai, To·biʹjah, and Je·daʹiah what they brought from the people in exile; and on that day, you must go to the house of Jo·siʹah the son of Zeph·a·niʹah along with these who have come from Babylon.
11 You should take silver and gold and make a crown and put it on the head of Joshua son of Je·hozʹa·dak, the high priest.
12 And say to him, “‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “Here is the man whose name is Sprout. He will sprout from his own place, and he will build the temple of Jehovah.
13 He is the one who will build the temple of Jehovah, and he is the one who will assume the majesty. He will sit down on his throne and rule, and he will also be a priest on his throne, and there will be a peaceable agreement between the two.
14 And the crown will serve as a memorial for Heʹlem, To·biʹjah, Je·daʹiah, and Hen the son of Zeph·a·niʹah, in the temple of Jehovah.
15 And those who are far away will come and take part in building the temple of Jehovah.” And you will have to know that Jehovah of armies has sent me to you. And it will occur—if you do not fail to listen to the voice of Jehovah your God.’”
8 The word of Jehovah of armies again came, saying:
2 “This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘I will be zealous for Zion with a great zeal, and with great wrath I will be zealous for her.’”
3 “This is what Jehovah says, ‘I will return to Zion and reside in Jerusalem; and Jerusalem will be called the city of truth, and the mountain of Jehovah of armies, the holy mountain.’”
4 “This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Old men and women will again sit in the public squares of Jerusalem, each with his staff in his hand because of his great age.
5 And the public squares of the city will be filled with boys and girls playing there.’”
6 “This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Although it may seem too difficult to the remaining ones of this people in those days, should it seem too difficult also to me?’ declares Jehovah of armies.”
7 “This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Here I am saving my people from the lands of the east and the west.
8 And I will bring them in, and they will reside in Jerusalem; and they will become my people, and I will become their God in truth and in righteousness.’”
9 “This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Let your hands be strong, you who now hear these words from the mouth of the prophets, the same words that were spoken on the day the foundation of the house of Jehovah of armies was laid for the temple to be built.
10 For before that time, there were no wages being paid either for man or for beast; and it was not safe to come and go because of the adversary, for I turned all men one against another.’
11 “‘But now I will not deal with the remaining ones of this people as in the former days,’ declares Jehovah of armies.
12 ‘For the seed of peace will be sown; the vine will produce its fruit and the earth its yield, and the heavens will give their dew; and I will cause the remaining ones of this people to inherit all these things.
13 And just as you became an object of cursing among the nations, O house of Judah and house of Israel, so I will save you, and you will become a blessing. Do not be afraid! Let your hands be strong.’
14 “For this is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘“Just as I had determined to bring calamity on you because your forefathers made me indignant,” says Jehovah of armies, “and I felt no regret,
15 so at this time I have determined to do good to Jerusalem and to the house of Judah. Do not be afraid!”’
16 “‘These are the things you should do: Speak the truth with one another, and the judgments in your gates must promote truth and peace.
17 Do not scheme calamity against one another in your hearts, and do not love any false oath; for these are all things that I hate,’ declares Jehovah.”
18 The word of Jehovah of armies again came to me, saying:
19 “This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘The fast of the fourth month, the fast of the fifth month, the fast of the seventh month, and the fast of the tenth month will be occasions for exultation and joy for the house of Judah—festivals of rejoicing. So love truth and peace.’
20 “This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘It will yet come to pass that peoples and the inhabitants of many cities will come;
21 and the inhabitants of one city will go to those of another and say: “Let us earnestly go to beg for the favor of Jehovah and to seek Jehovah of armies. I am also going.”
22 And many peoples and mighty nations will come to seek Jehovah of armies in Jerusalem and to beg for the favor of Jehovah.’
23 “This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘In those days ten men out of all the languages of the nations will take hold, yes, they will take firm hold of the robe of a Jew, saying: “We want to go with you, for we have heard that God is with you people.”’”
9 A pronouncement: “The word of Jehovah is against the land of Haʹdrach, And Damascus is its target —For Jehovah’s eye is on mankind And on all the tribes of Israel—
2 And against Haʹmath, which borders on her, And against Tyre and Siʹdon, for they are so wise.
3 Tyre built herself a rampart. She piled up silver like dust And gold like the dirt of the streets.
4 Look! Jehovah will take away her possessions, And he will strike down her army into the sea; And she will be consumed in the fire.
5 Ashʹke·lon will see it and be afraid; Gazʹa will feel great anguish, Also Ekʹron, because her hope is put to shame. A king will perish from Gazʹa, And Ashʹke·lon will not be inhabited.
6 An illegitimate son will settle in Ashʹdod, And I will do away with the pride of the Phi·lisʹtine.
7 I will remove the bloodstained things from his mouth And the disgusting things from between his teeth, And he will be left remaining for our God; And he will become like a sheikh in Judah, And Ekʹron like the Jebʹu·site.
8 I will encamp as a guard for my house, So that there will be no one passing through and no one returning; And no taskmaster will pass through again, For now I have seen it with my eyes.
9 Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion. Shout in triumph, O daughter of Jerusalem. Look! Your king is coming to you. He is righteous, bringing salvation, Humble and riding on a donkey, On a colt, the foal of a female donkey.
10 I will take away the war chariot from Eʹphra·im And the horse from Jerusalem. The battle bow will be taken away. And he will proclaim peace to the nations; His rulership will be from sea to sea And from the River to the ends of the earth.
11 As for you, O woman, by the blood of your covenant, I will send your prisoners out of the waterless pit.
12 Return to the stronghold, you prisoners with hope. Today I am telling you, ‘I will repay to you, O woman, a double portion.
13 For I will bend Judah as my bow. The bow I will fill with Eʹphra·im, And I will awaken your sons, O Zion, Against your sons, O Greece, And I will make you like a warrior’s sword.’
14 Jehovah will be seen over them, And his arrow will go out like lightning. The Sovereign Lord Jehovah will sound the horn, And he will advance with the windstorms of the south.
15 Jehovah of armies will defend them, And they will devour and subdue the slingstones. They will drink and be boisterous, as if with wine; And they will be filled like the bowl, Like the corners of the altar.
16 Jehovah their God will save them in that day As the flock of his people; For they will be like the gemstones of a crown glittering over his soil.
17 For how great his goodness is, And how great his handsomeness is! Grain will make the young men thrive, And new wine the virgins.”
10 “Ask Jehovah for rain in the time of the spring rain. It is Jehovah who makes the storm clouds, Who pours rain for them, And gives vegetation in the field to everyone.
2 For the teraphim statues have spoken deception; And the diviners have visioned a lie. They speak about worthless dreams, And in vain they try to comfort. That is why they will wander like sheep. They will suffer, for there is no shepherd.
3 Against the shepherds my anger burns, And against the oppressive leaders I will hold an accounting; For Jehovah of armies has turned his attention to his flock, to the house of Judah, And he has made them like his majestic horse in the battle.
4 From him comes the keyman, From him comes the supporting ruler, From him comes the battle bow; From him goes forth every overseer, all of them together.
5 And they will become like warriors, Trampling down the mud of the streets in the battle. They will wage war, for Jehovah is with them; And the riders of horses will be put to shame.
6 I will make the house of Judah superior, And the house of Joseph I will save. I will restore them, For I will show them mercy; And they will be as though I had never cast them off; For I am Jehovah their God, and I will answer them.
7 Those of Eʹphra·im must become like a mighty warrior, And their heart will rejoice as though from wine. Their sons will see this and rejoice; Their heart will be joyful in Jehovah.
8 ‘I will whistle for them and gather them together; For I will redeem them, and they will become many, And continue to be many.
9 Though I scatter them like seed among the peoples, They will remember me in the distant places; With their sons they will revive and return.
10 I will bring them back from the land of Egypt And gather them from As·syrʹi·a; I will bring them to the land of Gilʹe·ad and Lebʹa·non, And there will be no more room for them.
11 He must pass through the sea with distress; And in the sea he will strike down the waves; All the depths of the Nile will dry up. The pride of As·syrʹi·a will be brought down, And the scepter of Egypt will depart.
12 I will make them superior in Jehovah, And they will walk about in his name,’ declares Jehovah.”
12 A pronouncement: “The word of Jehovah concerning Israel,” declares Jehovah, The One who stretched out the heavens, Who laid the foundation of the earth, And who formed the spirit of man within him.
2 “Here I am making Jerusalem a cup that causes all the surrounding peoples to stagger; and there will be a siege against Judah as well as against Jerusalem.
3 In that day I will make Jerusalem a heavy stone to all the peoples. All those who lift it are sure to be severely injured; and all the nations of the earth will be gathered against her.
4 In that day,” declares Jehovah, “I will strike every horse with panic and its rider with madness. I will keep my eyes on the house of Judah, but I will strike every horse of the peoples with blindness.
5 And the sheikhs of Judah will say in their heart, ‘The inhabitants of Jerusalem are a strength to me by means of Jehovah of armies their God.’
6 In that day I will make the sheikhs of Judah like a fiery pot among wood and like a fiery torch in a row of cut grain, and they will consume all the surrounding peoples on the right and on the left; and Jerusalem will again be inhabited in her place, in Jerusalem.
7 “And Jehovah will save the tents of Judah first, so that the beauty of the house of David and the beauty of the inhabitants of Jerusalem may not be too great over Judah.
8 In that day Jehovah will be a defense around the inhabitants of Jerusalem; in that day the one who stumbles among them will be like David, and the house of David like God, like Jehovah’s angel who goes before them.
9 And in that day I will be certain to annihilate all the nations that come against Jerusalem.
10 “I will pour out on the house of David and on the inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of favor and supplication, and they will look to the one whom they pierced, and they will wail over him as they would wail over an only son; and they will grieve bitterly over him as they would grieve over a firstborn son.
11 In that day the wailing in Jerusalem will be great, like the wailing at Ha·dad·rimʹmon in the Plain of Me·gidʹdo.
12 And the land will wail, each family by itself; the family of David’s house by itself, and their women by themselves; the family of Nathan’s house by itself, and their women by themselves;
13 the family of Leʹvi’s house by itself, and their women by themselves; the family of the Shimʹe·ites by itself, and their women by themselves;
14 and all the families that are left remaining, each family by itself, and their women by themselves.
13 “In that day a well will be opened to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for cleansing sin and impurity.
2 “In that day,” declares Jehovah of armies, “I will erase the names of the idols from the land, and they will no longer be remembered; and I will rid the land of the prophets and the spirit of uncleanness.
3 And if a man should prophesy again, his father and his mother who caused his birth will say to him, ‘You will not live, because you have spoken lies in the name of Jehovah.’ And his father and his mother who caused his birth will pierce him through because of his prophesying.
4 “In that day each of the prophets will be ashamed of his vision when he prophesies; and they will not wear an official garment of hair in order to deceive.
5 And he will say, ‘I am no prophet. I am a man cultivating the soil, because a man bought me when I was young.’
6 And if someone asks him, ‘What are these wounds between your shoulders?’ he will answer, ‘Wounds I received in the house of my friends.’”
7 “O sword, awake against my shepherd, Against the man who is my companion,” declares Jehovah of armies. “Strike the shepherd, and let the flock be scattered; And I will turn my hand against those who are insignificant.”
8 “And in all the land,” declares Jehovah, “Two parts in it will be cut off and perish; And the third part will be left remaining in it.
9 And I will bring the third part through the fire; And I will refine them as silver is refined, And test them as gold is tested. They will call on my name, And I will answer them. I will say, ‘They are my people,’ And they will say, ‘Jehovah is our God.’”
14 “Look! The day is coming, a day belonging to Jehovah, when the spoil from you will be divided in your midst.
2 I will gather all the nations against Jerusalem for the war; and the city will be captured and the houses plundered and the women raped. And half of the city will go into exile, but the remaining ones of the people will not be cut off from the city.
3 “Jehovah will go out and war against those nations as when he fights in the day of a battle.
4 In that day his feet will stand on the Mount of Olives, which faces Jerusalem on the east; and the Mount of Olives will be split in half, from east to west, forming a very great valley; and half of the mountain will move to the north, and half of it to the south.
5 You will flee to the valley of my mountains, for the valley of the mountains will extend all the way to Aʹzel. You will have to flee, just as you fled because of the earthquake in the days of King Uz·ziʹah of Judah. And Jehovah my God will come, and all the holy ones will be with him.
6 “In that day there will be no precious light—things will be congealed.
7 And it will become one day that is known as belonging to Jehovah. It will not be day, nor will it be night; and at evening time there will be light.
8 In that day living waters will flow out from Jerusalem, half of them toward the eastern sea and half of them toward the western sea. It will happen in summer and in winter.
9 And Jehovah will be King over all the earth. In that day Jehovah will be one, and his name one.
10 “The whole land will become like the Arʹa·bah, from Geʹba to Rimʹmon south of Jerusalem; and she will rise and be inhabited in her place, from the Gate of Benjamin all the way to the site of the First Gate, all the way to the Corner Gate, and from the Tower of Ha·nanʹel all the way to the winepresses of the king.
11 And people will inhabit her; and there will never again be a curse of destruction, and Jerusalem will be inhabited in security.
12 “And this is the scourge with which Jehovah will scourge all the peoples who wage war against Jerusalem: Their flesh will rot away while they stand on their feet, their eyes will rot away in their sockets, and their tongues will rot away in their mouths.
13 “In that day confusion from Jehovah will be widespread among them; and each one will grab hold of the hand of his companion, and his hand will come against the hand of his companion.
14 Judah will also be involved in the war at Jerusalem; and the wealth of all the surrounding nations will be gathered, gold and silver and garments in vast quantity.
15 “And a scourge like that scourge will also come against the horses, the mules, the camels, the donkeys, and all the livestock that are in those camps.
16 “Everyone who is left remaining out of all the nations that come against Jerusalem will go up from year to year to bow down to the King, Jehovah of armies, and to celebrate the Festival of Booths.
17 But if anyone among the families of the earth does not go up to Jerusalem to bow down to the King, Jehovah of armies, no rain will fall on them.
18 And if the family of Egypt does not come up and does not come in, they will have no rain. Instead, they will have the scourge with which Jehovah scourges the nations that do not come up to celebrate the Festival of Booths.
19 This will be the punishment for the sin of Egypt and the sin of all the nations that do not come up to celebrate the Festival of Booths.
20 “In that day the words ‘Holiness belongs to Jehovah!’ will be written on the bells of the horses. And the cooking pots in the house of Jehovah will be like the bowls before the altar.
21 And every cooking pot in Jerusalem and in Judah will be holy and will belong to Jehovah of armies, and all those who are sacrificing will come in and use some of them for boiling. In that day there will no longer be a Caʹnaan·ite in the house of Jehovah of armies.”
1 A pronouncement: The word of Jehovah to Israel through Malʹa·chi:
2 “I have shown love to you people,” says Jehovah. But you say: “How have you shown us love?” “Was not Eʹsau the brother of Jacob?” declares Jehovah. “But I loved Jacob,
3 and Eʹsau I hated; and I made his mountains desolate and left his inheritance for the jackals of the wilderness.”
4 “Though Eʹdom says, ‘We have been shattered, but we will return and rebuild the ruins,’ this is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘They will build, but I will tear down, and they will be called “the territory of wickedness” and “the people whom Jehovah has forever condemned.”
5 Your own eyes will see it, and you will say: “May Jehovah be magnified over the territory of Israel.”’”
6 “‘A son honors a father, and a servant his master. So if I am a father, where is the honor due me? And if I am a master, where is the fear due me?’ Jehovah of armies says to you priests who are despising my name. “‘But you say: “How have we despised your name?”’
7 “‘By presenting polluted food on my altar.’ “‘And you say: “How have we polluted you?”’ “‘By saying: “The table of Jehovah is something to be despised.”
8 And when you present a blind animal as a sacrifice, you say: “It is nothing bad.” And when you present a lame animal or a sick one: “It is nothing bad.”’” “Try presenting them, please, to your governor. Will he be pleased with you or receive you with favor?” says Jehovah of armies.
9 “And now, please, appeal to God, that he may show us favor. With such offerings from your own hand, will he receive any of you with favor?” says Jehovah of armies.
10 “And who among you is willing to shut the doors? For you will not even light my altar without charge. I find no delight in you,” says Jehovah of armies, “and I take no pleasure in any gift offering from your hand.”
11 “For from the rising of the sun to its setting, my name will be great among the nations. In every place sacrifices will be made to smoke, and offerings will be made to my name, as a pure gift; because my name will be great among the nations,” says Jehovah of armies.
12 “But you are profaning it by saying, ‘The table of Jehovah is polluted, and its fruit, its food, is to be despised.’
13 You also say, ‘Look! How tiresome!’ and you sniff scornfully at it,” says Jehovah of armies. “And you bring stolen, lame, and sick animals. Yes, you bring such things as a gift! Should I accept it from your hand?” says Jehovah.
14 “Cursed is the cunning one who has a sound male animal in his flock, but he makes a vow and sacrifices a blemished one to Jehovah. For I am a great King,” says Jehovah of armies, “and my name will be awe-inspiring among the nations.”
2 “And now, O priests, this commandment is for you.
2 If you refuse to listen and to take it to heart to glorify my name,” says Jehovah of armies, “I will send on you the curse, and I will turn your blessings into curses. Yes, I have turned the blessings into curses, because you are not taking it to heart.”
3 “Look! I will ruin your sown seed because of you, and I will scatter dung on your faces, the dung of your festivals; and you will be carried away to it.
4 Then you will know that I have given this commandment to you so that my covenant with Leʹvi may continue,” says Jehovah of armies.
5 “My covenant with him was one of life and of peace, which I gave to him, along with fear. He feared me, yes, he stood in awe of my name.
6 The law of truth was in his mouth, and no unrighteousness was found on his lips. He walked with me in peace and in uprightness, and he turned many back from error.
7 For the lips of a priest should safeguard knowledge, and people should seek the law from his mouth, because he is the messenger of Jehovah of armies.
8 “But you yourselves have turned aside from the way. You have made many stumble with regard to the law. You have ruined the covenant of Leʹvi,” says Jehovah of armies.
9 “So I will make you despised and low before all the people, because you did not keep my ways but showed partiality in applying the law.”
10 “Do we not all have one father? Was it not one God who created us? So why do we deal treacherously with one another, profaning the covenant of our forefathers?
11 Judah has dealt treacherously, and something detestable has been done in Israel and in Jerusalem; for Judah has profaned the holiness of Jehovah, which He loves, and he has taken as a bride the daughter of a foreign god.
12 Jehovah will cut off from the tents of Jacob anyone who does this, whoever he may be, though he presents a gift offering to Jehovah of armies.”
13 “And there is another thing that you do, which results in covering the altar of Jehovah with tears and with weeping and sighing, so that he no longer pays attention to your gift offering or looks favorably on anything from your hand.
14 And you say, ‘For what reason?’ It is because Jehovah has acted as a witness between you and the wife of your youth, with whom you have dealt treacherously, although she is your partner and your wife by covenant.
15 But there was one who did not do it, for he had what remained of the spirit. And what was that one seeking? The offspring of God. So guard yourselves respecting your spirit, and do not deal treacherously with the wife of your youth.
16 For I hate divorce,” says Jehovah the God of Israel, “and the one who covers his garment with violence,” says Jehovah of armies. “And guard yourselves respecting your spirit, and you must not deal treacherously.
17 “You have made Jehovah weary with your words. But you say, ‘How have we made him weary?’ By saying, ‘Everyone who does bad is good in the eyes of Jehovah, and he finds pleasure in him,’ or by saying, ‘Where is the God of justice?’”
3 “Look! I am sending my messenger, and he will clear up a way before me. And suddenly the true Lord, whom you are seeking, will come to his temple; and the messenger of the covenant will come, in whom you take delight. Look! He will certainly come,” says Jehovah of armies.
2 “But who will endure the day of his coming, and who will be able to stand when he appears? For he will be like the fire of a refiner and like the lye of laundrymen.
3 And he will sit as a refiner and cleanser of silver and will cleanse the sons of Leʹvi; and he will clarify them like gold and like silver, and they will certainly become to Jehovah people presenting a gift offering in righteousness.
4 And the gift offering of Judah and of Jerusalem will actually be pleasing to Jehovah, as in the days of long ago and as in the years of antiquity.
5 “I will come near to you for judgment, and I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, against the adulterers, against those who take false oaths, against those who defraud the hired worker, the widow, and the fatherless child, and against those who refuse to help the foreigner. These have not feared me,” says Jehovah of armies.
6 “For I am Jehovah; I do not change. And you are sons of Jacob; you have not yet come to your finish.
7 From the days of your forefathers you have turned aside from my regulations and have not kept them. Return to me, and I will return to you,” says Jehovah of armies. But you say: “How are we supposed to return?”
8 “Will a mere human rob God? But you are robbing me.” And you say: “How have we robbed you?” “In the tithes and in the contributions.
9 You are certainly cursed, for you are robbing me—yes, the entire nation is doing so.
10 Bring the entire tithe into the storehouse, so that there may be food in my house; and test me out, please, in this regard,” Jehovah of armies says, “to see whether I will not open to you the floodgates of the heavens and pour out on you a blessing until there is nothing lacking.”
11 “And I will rebuke the devouring one for you, and it will not ruin the fruit of your land, nor will the vine in your field be fruitless,” says Jehovah of armies.
12 “All the nations will have to declare you happy, for you will become a land of delight,” says Jehovah of armies.
13 “Your words against me have been strong,” says Jehovah. And you say: “How have we spoken against you among ourselves?”
14 “You say, ‘It is of no value to serve God. How have we benefited by keeping our obligations to him and by walking somberly before Jehovah of armies?
15 Now we consider presumptuous people happy. Also, those who practice wickedness are successful. They dare to put God to the test and get away with it.’”
16 At that time those who fear Jehovah spoke with one another, each one with his companion, and Jehovah kept paying attention and listening. And a book of remembrance was written before him for those fearing Jehovah and for those meditating on his name.
17 “And they will be mine,” says Jehovah of armies, “in the day when I produce a special property. I will show them compassion, just as a man shows compassion to his son who serves him.
18 And you will again see the distinction between a righteous person and a wicked person, between one serving God and one not serving him.”
4 “For look! the day is coming, burning like a furnace, when all the presumptuous ones and all those practicing wickedness will become like stubble. The coming day will certainly devour them,” says Jehovah of armies, “and it will leave them neither root nor branch.
2 But on you who honor my name, the sun of righteousness will shine, with healing in its rays; and you will skip about like fattened calves.”
3 “And you will tread the wicked underfoot, for they will be like dust under the soles of your feet on the day when I take action,” says Jehovah of armies.
4 “Remember the Law of my servant Moses, the regulations and judgments that I commanded at Hoʹreb for all Israel to obey.
5 “Look! I am sending to you E·liʹjah the prophet before the coming of the great and awe-inspiring day of Jehovah.
6 And he will turn the hearts of fathers back toward sons, and the hearts of sons back toward fathers, so that I may not come and strike the earth, devoting it to destruction.” (End of the translation of the Hebrew-Aramaic Scriptures, to be followed by that of the Christian Greek Scriptures)
2 After Jesus had been born in Bethʹle·hem of Ju·deʹa in the days of Herod the king, look! astrologers from the East came to Jerusalem,
2 saying: “Where is the one born king of the Jews? For we saw his star when we were in the East, and we have come to do obeisance to him.”
3 At hearing this, King Herod was agitated, and all Jerusalem with him.
4 On gathering together all the chief priests and scribes of the people, he inquired of them where the Christ was to be born.
5 They said to him: “In Bethʹle·hem of Ju·deʹa, for this is how it has been written through the prophet:
6 ‘And you, O Bethʹle·hem of the land of Judah, are by no means the most insignificant city among the governors of Judah, for out of you will come a governing one, who will shepherd my people Israel.’”
7 Then Herod secretly summoned the astrologers and carefully ascertained from them the time of the star’s appearing.
8 When sending them to Bethʹle·hem, he said: “Go make a careful search for the young child, and when you have found him, report back to me so that I too may go and do obeisance to him.”
9 After they had heard the king, they went their way, and look! the star they had seen when they were in the East went ahead of them until it came to a stop above where the young child was.
10 On seeing the star, they rejoiced with great joy.
11 And when they went into the house, they saw the young child with Mary his mother, and falling down, they did obeisance to him. They also opened their treasures and presented him with gifts—gold and frankincense and myrrh.
12 However, because they were given divine warning in a dream not to return to Herod, they departed for their country by another way.
13 After they had departed, look! Jehovah’s angel appeared to Joseph in a dream, saying: “Get up, take the young child and his mother and flee to Egypt, and stay there until I give you word, for Herod is about to search for the young child to kill him.”
14 So Joseph got up and by night took along the young child and the child’s mother and went into Egypt.
15 He stayed there until the death of Herod. This fulfilled what was spoken by Jehovah through his prophet, saying: “Out of Egypt I called my son.”
16 Then Herod, seeing that he had been outwitted by the astrologers, flew into a great rage, and he sent out and had all the boys in Bethʹle·hem and in all its districts killed, from two years of age and under, according to the time that he had carefully ascertained from the astrologers.
17 Then was fulfilled what was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet, who said:
18 “A voice was heard in Raʹmah, weeping and much wailing. It was Rachel weeping for her children, and she was unwilling to take comfort, because they are no more.”
19 When Herod had died, look! Jehovah’s angel appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt
20 and said: “Get up, take the young child and his mother and go into the land of Israel, for those who were seeking the life of the young child are dead.”
21 So he got up and took the young child and the child’s mother and entered into the land of Israel.
22 But hearing that Ar·che·laʹus ruled Ju·deʹa instead of his father Herod, he was afraid to go there. Moreover, being given divine warning in a dream, he withdrew into the territory of Galʹi·lee.
23 And he came and settled in a city named Nazʹa·reth, in order to fulfill what was spoken through the prophets: “He will be called a Naz·a·reneʹ.”
3 In those days John the Baptist came preaching in the wilderness of Ju·deʹa,
2 saying: “Repent, for the Kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.”
3 This, in fact, is the one spoken of through Isaiah the prophet in these words: “A voice of one calling out in the wilderness: ‘Prepare the way of Jehovah! Make his roads straight.’”
4 Now John was clothed with camel’s hair and had a leather belt around his waist. His food was locusts and wild honey.
5 Then the people of Jerusalem and all Ju·deʹa and all the country around the Jordan were going out to him,
6 and they were baptized by him in the Jordan River, openly confessing their sins.
7 When he caught sight of many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to the baptism, he said to them: “You offspring of vipers, who has warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
8 Therefore, produce fruit that befits repentance.
9 Do not presume to say to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father.’ For I say to you that God is able to raise up children for Abraham from these stones.
10 The ax is already lying at the root of the trees. Every tree, then, that does not produce fine fruit is to be cut down and thrown into the fire.
11 I, for my part, baptize you with water because of your repentance, but the one coming after me is stronger than I am, whose sandals I am not worthy to take off. That one will baptize you with holy spirit and with fire.
12 His winnowing shovel is in his hand, and he will clean up his threshing floor completely and will gather his wheat into the storehouse, but the chaff he will burn up with fire that cannot be put out.”
13 Then Jesus came from Galʹi·lee to the Jordan to John, in order to be baptized by him.
14 But the latter tried to prevent him, saying: “I am the one who needs to be baptized by you, and are you coming to me?”
15 Jesus replied to him: “Let it be this time, for in that way it is suitable for us to carry out all that is righteous.” Then he quit preventing him.
16 After being baptized, Jesus immediately came up from the water; and look! the heavens were opened up, and he saw God’s spirit descending like a dove and coming upon him.
17 Look! Also, a voice from the heavens said: “This is my Son, the beloved, whom I have approved.”
5 When he saw the crowds, he went up on the mountain; and after he sat down, his disciples came to him.
2 Then he opened his mouth and began teaching them, saying:
3 “Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need, since the Kingdom of the heavens belongs to them.
4 “Happy are those who mourn, since they will be comforted.
5 “Happy are the mild-tempered, since they will inherit the earth.
6 “Happy are those hungering and thirsting for righteousness, since they will be filled.
7 “Happy are the merciful, since they will be shown mercy.
8 “Happy are the pure in heart, since they will see God.
9 “Happy are the peacemakers, since they will be called sons of God.
10 “Happy are those who have been persecuted for righteousness’ sake, since the Kingdom of the heavens belongs to them.
11 “Happy are you when people reproach you and persecute you and lyingly say every sort of wicked thing against you for my sake.
12 Rejoice and be overjoyed, since your reward is great in the heavens, for in that way they persecuted the prophets prior to you.
13 “You are the salt of the earth, but if the salt loses its strength, how will its saltiness be restored? It is no longer usable for anything except to be thrown outside to be trampled on by men.
14 “You are the light of the world. A city cannot be hid when located on a mountain.
15 People light a lamp and set it, not under a basket, but on the lampstand, and it shines on all those in the house.
16 Likewise, let your light shine before men, so that they may see your fine works and give glory to your Father who is in the heavens.
17 “Do not think I came to destroy the Law or the Prophets. I came, not to destroy, but to fulfill.
18 Truly I say to you that sooner would heaven and earth pass away than for one smallest letter or one stroke of a letter to pass away from the Law until all things take place.
19 Whoever, therefore, breaks one of these least commandments and teaches others to do so will be called least in relation to the Kingdom of the heavens. But whoever does them and teaches them will be called great in relation to the Kingdom of the heavens.
20 For I say to you that if your righteousness does not surpass that of the scribes and the Pharisees, you will by no means enter into the Kingdom of the heavens.
21 “You heard that it was said to those of ancient times: ‘You must not murder, but whoever commits a murder will be accountable to the court of justice.’
22 However, I say to you that everyone who continues wrathful with his brother will be accountable to the court of justice; and whoever addresses his brother with an unspeakable word of contempt will be accountable to the Supreme Court; whereas whoever says, ‘You despicable fool!’ will be liable to the fiery Ge·henʹna.
23 “If, then, you are bringing your gift to the altar and there you remember that your brother has something against you,
24 leave your gift there in front of the altar, and go away. First make your peace with your brother, and then come back and offer your gift.
25 “Be quick to settle matters with your legal opponent, while you are with him on the way there, so that somehow the opponent may not turn you over to the judge, and the judge to the court attendant, and you get thrown into prison.
26 I say to you for a fact, you will certainly not come out of there until you have paid over your last small coin.
27 “You heard that it was said: ‘You must not commit adultery.’
28 But I say to you that everyone who keeps on looking at a woman so as to have a passion for her has already committed adultery with her in his heart.
29 If, now, your right eye is making you stumble, tear it out and throw it away from you. For it is better for you to lose one of your members than for your whole body to be pitched into Ge·henʹna.
30 Also, if your right hand is making you stumble, cut it off and throw it away from you. For it is better for you to lose one of your members than for your whole body to land in Ge·henʹna.
31 “Moreover, it was said: ‘Whoever divorces his wife, let him give her a certificate of divorce.’
32 However, I say to you that everyone divorcing his wife, except on account of sexual immorality, makes her a subject for adultery, and whoever marries a divorced woman commits adultery.
33 “Again you heard that it was said to those of ancient times: ‘You must not swear without performing, but you must pay your vows to Jehovah.’
34 However, I say to you: Do not swear at all, neither by heaven, for it is God’s throne;
35 nor by earth, for it is the footstool of his feet; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King.
36 Do not swear by your head, since you cannot turn one hair white or black.
37 Just let your word ‘Yes’ mean yes, your ‘No,’ no, for what goes beyond these is from the wicked one.
38 “You heard that it was said: ‘Eye for eye and tooth for tooth.’
39 However, I say to you: Do not resist the one who is wicked, but whoever slaps you on your right cheek, turn the other also to him.
40 And if a person wants to take you to court and get possession of your inner garment, let him also have your outer garment;
41 and if someone in authority compels you into service for a mile, go with him two miles.
42 Give to the one asking you, and do not turn away from one who wants to borrow from you.
43 “You heard that it was said: ‘You must love your neighbor and hate your enemy.’
44 However, I say to you: Continue to love your enemies and to pray for those who persecute you,
45 so that you may prove yourselves sons of your Father who is in the heavens, since he makes his sun rise on both the wicked and the good and makes it rain on both the righteous and the unrighteous.
46 For if you love those loving you, what reward do you have? Are not also the tax collectors doing the same thing?
47 And if you greet your brothers only, what extraordinary thing are you doing? Are not also the people of the nations doing the same thing?
48 You must accordingly be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect.
6 “Take care not to practice your righteousness in front of men to be noticed by them; otherwise you will have no reward with your Father who is in the heavens.
2 So when you make gifts of mercy, do not blow a trumpet ahead of you, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, so that they may be glorified by men. Truly I say to you, they have their reward in full.
3 But you, when making gifts of mercy, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing,
4 so that your gifts of mercy may be in secret. Then your Father who looks on in secret will repay you.
5 “Also, when you pray, do not act like the hypocrites, for they like to pray standing in the synagogues and on the corners of the main streets to be seen by men. Truly I say to you, they have their reward in full.
6 But when you pray, go into your private room and, after shutting your door, pray to your Father who is in secret. Then your Father who looks on in secret will repay you.
7 When praying, do not say the same things over and over again as the people of the nations do, for they imagine they will get a hearing for their use of many words.
8 So do not be like them, for your Father knows what you need even before you ask him.
9 “You must pray, then, this way: “‘Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified.
10 Let your Kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also on earth.
11 Give us today our bread for this day;
12 and forgive us our debts, as we also have forgiven our debtors.
13 And do not bring us into temptation, but deliver us from the wicked one.’
14 “For if you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you;
15 whereas if you do not forgive men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.
16 “When you fast, stop becoming sad-faced like the hypocrites, for they disfigure their faces so they may appear to men to be fasting. Truly I say to you, they have their reward in full.
17 But you, when fasting, put oil on your head and wash your face,
18 so that you may not appear to be fasting to men but only to your Father who is in secret. Then your Father who looks on in secret will repay you.
19 “Stop storing up for yourselves treasures on the earth, where moth and rust consume and where thieves break in and steal.
20 Rather, store up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust consumes, and where thieves do not break in and steal.
21 For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
22 “The lamp of the body is the eye. If, then, your eye is focused, your whole body will be bright.
23 But if your eye is envious, your whole body will be dark. If the light that is in you is really darkness, how great that darkness is!
24 “No one can slave for two masters; for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will stick to the one and despise the other. You cannot slave for God and for Riches.
25 “On this account I say to you: Stop being anxious about your lives as to what you will eat or what you will drink, or about your bodies as to what you will wear. Does not life mean more than food and the body than clothing?
26 Observe intently the birds of heaven; they do not sow seed or reap or gather into storehouses, yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not worth more than they are?
27 Who of you by being anxious can add one cubit to his life span?
28 Also, why are you anxious about clothing? Take a lesson from the lilies of the field, how they grow; they do not toil, nor do they spin;
29 but I tell you that not even Solʹo·mon in all his glory was arrayed as one of these.
30 Now if this is how God clothes the vegetation of the field that is here today and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, will he not much rather clothe you, you with little faith?
31 So never be anxious and say, ‘What are we to eat?’ or, ‘What are we to drink?’ or, ‘What are we to wear?’
32 For all these are the things the nations are eagerly pursuing. Your heavenly Father knows that you need all these things.
33 “Keep on, then, seeking first the Kingdom and his righteousness, and all these other things will be added to you.
34 So never be anxious about the next day, for the next day will have its own anxieties. Each day has enough of its own troubles.
7 “Stop judging that you may not be judged;
2 for with the judgment you are judging, you will be judged, and with the measure that you are measuring out, they will measure out to you.
3 Why, then, do you look at the straw in your brother’s eye but do not notice the rafter in your own eye?
4 Or how can you say to your brother, ‘Allow me to remove the straw from your eye,’ when look! a rafter is in your own eye?
5 Hypocrite! First remove the rafter from your own eye, and then you will see clearly how to remove the straw from your brother’s eye.
6 “Do not give what is holy to dogs nor throw your pearls before swine, so that they may never trample them under their feet and turn around and rip you open.
7 “Keep on asking, and it will be given you; keep on seeking, and you will find; keep on knocking, and it will be opened to you;
8 for everyone asking receives, and everyone seeking finds, and to everyone knocking, it will be opened.
9 Indeed, which one of you, if his son asks for bread, will hand him a stone?
10 Or if he asks for a fish, he will not hand him a serpent, will he?
11 Therefore, if you, although being wicked, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more so will your Father who is in the heavens give good things to those asking him!
12 “All things, therefore, that you want men to do to you, you also must do to them. This, in fact, is what the Law and the Prophets mean.
13 “Go in through the narrow gate, because broad is the gate and spacious is the road leading off into destruction, and many are going in through it;
14 whereas narrow is the gate and cramped the road leading off into life, and few are finding it.
15 “Be on the watch for the false prophets who come to you in sheep’s covering, but inside they are ravenous wolves.
16 By their fruits you will recognize them. Never do people gather grapes from thorns or figs from thistles, do they?
17 Likewise, every good tree produces fine fruit, but every rotten tree produces worthless fruit.
18 A good tree cannot bear worthless fruit, nor can a rotten tree produce fine fruit.
19 Every tree not producing fine fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.
20 Really, then, by their fruits you will recognize those men.
21 “Not everyone saying to me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ will enter into the Kingdom of the heavens, but only the one doing the will of my Father who is in the heavens will.
22 Many will say to me in that day: ‘Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy in your name, and expel demons in your name, and perform many powerful works in your name?’
23 And then I will declare to them: ‘I never knew you! Get away from me, you workers of lawlessness!’
24 “Therefore, everyone who hears these sayings of mine and does them will be like a discreet man who built his house on the rock.
25 And the rain poured down and the floods came and the winds blew and lashed against that house, but it did not cave in, for it had been founded on the rock.
26 Furthermore, everyone hearing these sayings of mine and not doing them will be like a foolish man who built his house on the sand.
27 And the rain poured down and the floods came and the winds blew and struck against that house, and it caved in, and its collapse was great.”
28 When Jesus finished these sayings, the effect was that the crowds were astounded at his way of teaching,
29 for he was teaching them as a person having authority, and not as their scribes.
8 After he came down from the mountain, large crowds followed him.
2 And look! a leper came up and did obeisance to him, saying: “Lord, if you just want to, you can make me clean.”
3 So stretching out his hand, he touched him, saying: “I want to! Be made clean.” Immediately his leprosy was cleansed away.
4 Then Jesus said to him: “See that you tell no one, but go, show yourself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses appointed, for a witness to them.”
5 When he entered Ca·perʹna·um, an army officer came to him, pleading with him
6 and saying: “Sir, my servant is laid up in the house with paralysis, and he is suffering terribly.”
7 He said to him: “When I get there, I will cure him.”
8 The army officer replied: “Sir, I am not worthy to have you come under my roof, but just say the word and my servant will be healed.
9 For I too am a man under authority, having soldiers under me, and I say to this one, ‘Go!’ and he goes, and to another, ‘Come!’ and he comes, and to my slave, ‘Do this!’ and he does it.”
10 When Jesus heard that, he was amazed and said to those following him: “I tell you the truth, with no one in Israel have I found so great a faith.
11 But I tell you that many from east and west will come and recline at the table with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of the heavens;
12 whereas the sons of the Kingdom will be thrown into the darkness outside. There is where their weeping and the gnashing of their teeth will be.”
13 Then Jesus said to the army officer: “Go. Just as you have shown faith, so let it come to pass for you.” And the servant was healed in that hour.
14 And Jesus, on coming into Peter’s house, saw his mother-in-law lying down and sick with fever.
15 So he touched her hand, and the fever left her, and she got up and began ministering to him.
16 But after it became evening, people brought him many demon-possessed ones; and he expelled the spirits with a word, and he cured all who were suffering,
17 in order to fulfill what was spoken through Isaiah the prophet: “He himself took our sicknesses and carried our diseases.”
18 When Jesus saw a crowd around him, he gave the command to depart for the other side.
19 And a scribe came up and said to him: “Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go.”
20 But Jesus said to him: “Foxes have dens and birds of heaven have nests, but the Son of man has nowhere to lay down his head.”
21 Then another of the disciples said to him: “Lord, permit me first to go and bury my father.”
22 Jesus said to him: “Keep following me, and let the dead bury their dead.”
23 And when he went aboard a boat, his disciples followed him.
24 Now look! a great storm arose on the sea, so that the boat was being covered by the waves; but he was sleeping.
25 And they came and woke him up, saying: “Lord, save us, we are about to perish!”
26 But he said to them: “Why are you so afraid, you with little faith?” Then he got up and rebuked the winds and the sea, and a great calm set in.
27 So the men were amazed and said: “What sort of person is this? Even the winds and the sea obey him.”
28 When he came to the other side into the region of the Gad·a·renesʹ, two demon-possessed men coming out from among the tombs met him. They were unusually fierce, so nobody had the courage to pass by on that road.
29 And look! they screamed, saying: “What have we to do with you, Son of God? Did you come here to torment us before the appointed time?”
30 A long way off from them, a herd of many swine was feeding.
31 So the demons began to plead with him, saying: “If you expel us, send us into the herd of swine.”
32 And he said to them: “Go!” With that they came out and went off into the swine, and look! the entire herd rushed over the precipice into the sea and died in the waters.
33 But the herders fled, and going into the city, they reported everything, including the account of the demon-possessed men.
34 And look! all the city turned out to meet Jesus, and when they saw him, they urged him to depart from their region.
12 At that time Jesus went through the grainfields on the Sabbath. His disciples got hungry and started to pluck heads of grain and to eat.
2 At seeing this, the Pharisees said to him: “Look! Your disciples are doing what is not lawful to do on the Sabbath.”
3 He said to them: “Have you not read what David did when he and the men with him were hungry?
4 How he entered into the house of God and they ate the loaves of presentation, something that it was not lawful for him or those with him to eat, but for the priests only?
5 Or have you not read in the Law that on the Sabbaths the priests in the temple violate the Sabbath and continue guiltless?
6 But I tell you that something greater than the temple is here.
7 However, if you had understood what this means, ‘I want mercy and not sacrifice,’ you would not have condemned the guiltless ones.
8 For the Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath.”
9 After departing from that place, he went into their synagogue,
10 and look! there was a man with a withered hand! So they asked him, “Is it lawful to cure on the Sabbath?” so that they might accuse him.
11 He said to them: “If you have one sheep and that sheep falls into a pit on the Sabbath, is there a man among you who will not grab hold of it and lift it out?
12 How much more valuable is a man than a sheep! So it is lawful to do a fine thing on the Sabbath.”
13 Then he said to the man: “Stretch out your hand.” And he stretched it out, and it was restored sound like the other hand.
14 But the Pharisees went out and conspired against him to kill him.
15 Having come to know this, Jesus departed from there. Many also followed him, and he cured them all,
16 but he sternly ordered them not to make him known,
17 in order to fulfill what was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, who said:
18 “Look! My servant whom I chose, my beloved, whom I have approved! I will put my spirit upon him, and what justice is he will make clear to the nations.
19 He will not quarrel nor cry aloud, nor will anyone hear his voice in the main streets.
20 No bruised reed will he crush, and no smoldering wick will he extinguish, until he brings justice with success.
21 Indeed, in his name nations will hope.”
22 Then they brought him a demon-possessed man who was blind and speechless, and he cured him, so that the speechless man could speak and see.
23 Well, all the crowds were astounded and began to say: “May this not perhaps be the Son of David?”
24 At hearing this, the Pharisees said: “This fellow does not expel the demons except by means of Be·elʹze·bub, the ruler of the demons.”
25 Knowing their thoughts, he said to them: “Every kingdom divided against itself comes to ruin, and every city or house divided against itself will not stand.
26 In the same way, if Satan expels Satan, he has become divided against himself; how, then, will his kingdom stand?
27 Moreover, if I expel the demons by means of Be·elʹze·bub, by whom do your sons expel them? This is why they will be your judges.
28 But if it is by means of God’s spirit that I expel the demons, the Kingdom of God has really overtaken you.
29 Or how can anyone invade the house of a strong man and seize his possessions unless he first ties up the strong man? Only then can he plunder his house.
30 Whoever is not on my side is against me, and whoever does not gather with me scatters.
31 “For this reason I say to you, every sort of sin and blasphemy will be forgiven men, but the blasphemy against the spirit will not be forgiven.
32 For example, whoever speaks a word against the Son of man, it will be forgiven him; but whoever speaks against the holy spirit, it will not be forgiven him, no, not in this system of things nor in that to come.
33 “Either you make the tree fine and its fruit fine or make the tree rotten and its fruit rotten, for by its fruit the tree is known.
34 Offspring of vipers, how can you speak good things when you are wicked? For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.
35 The good man out of his good treasure sends out good things, whereas the wicked man out of his wicked treasure sends out wicked things.
36 I tell you that men will render an account on Judgment Day for every unprofitable saying that they speak;
37 for by your words you will be declared righteous, and by your words you will be condemned.”
38 Then as an answer to him, some of the scribes and the Pharisees said: “Teacher, we want to see a sign from you.”
39 In reply he said to them: “A wicked and adulterous generation keeps on seeking a sign, but no sign will be given it except the sign of Joʹnah the prophet.
40 For just as Joʹnah was in the belly of the huge fish for three days and three nights, so the Son of man will be in the heart of the earth for three days and three nights.
41 Men of Ninʹe·veh will rise up in the judgment with this generation and will condemn it, because they repented at what Joʹnah preached. But look! something more than Joʹnah is here.
42 The queen of the south will be raised up in the judgment with this generation and will condemn it, for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solʹo·mon. But look! something more than Solʹo·mon is here.
43 “When an unclean spirit comes out of a man, it passes through waterless places in search of a resting-place and finds none.
44 Then it says, ‘I will go back to my house from which I moved,’ and on arriving, it finds the house unoccupied but swept clean and adorned.
45 Then it goes and takes along with it seven different spirits more wicked than itself, and after getting inside, they dwell there; and the final circumstances of that man become worse than the first. That is how it will be also with this wicked generation.”
46 While he was yet speaking to the crowds, his mother and brothers were standing outside, seeking to speak to him.
47 So someone said to him: “Look! Your mother and your brothers are standing outside, seeking to speak to you.”
48 In reply he said to the one who spoke to him: “Who is my mother, and who are my brothers?”
49 And extending his hand toward his disciples, he said: “Look! My mother and my brothers!
50 For whoever does the will of my Father who is in heaven, that one is my brother and sister and mother.”
15 Then there came to Jesus from Jerusalem Pharisees and scribes, saying:
2 “Why do your disciples overstep the tradition of the men of former times? For example, they do not wash their hands when about to eat a meal.”
3 In reply he said to them: “Why do you overstep the commandment of God because of your tradition?
4 For example, God said, ‘Honor your father and your mother,’ and, ‘Let the one who speaks abusively of his father or mother be put to death.’
5 But you say, ‘Whoever says to his father or mother: “Whatever I have that could benefit you is a gift dedicated to God,”
6 he need not honor his father at all.’ So you have made the word of God invalid because of your tradition.
7 You hypocrites, Isaiah aptly prophesied about you when he said:
8 ‘This people honor me with their lips, but their hearts are far removed from me.
9 It is in vain that they keep worshipping me, for they teach commands of men as doctrines.’”
10 With that he called the crowd near and said to them: “Listen and get the sense of it:
11 It is not what enters into a man’s mouth that defiles him, but it is what comes out of his mouth that defiles him.”
12 Then the disciples came and said to him: “Do you know that the Pharisees were stumbled at hearing what you said?”
13 In reply he said: “Every plant that my heavenly Father did not plant will be uprooted.
14 Let them be. Blind guides is what they are. If, then, a blind man guides a blind man, both will fall into a pit.”
15 Peter responded: “Make the illustration plain to us.”
16 At this he said: “Are you also still without understanding?
17 Are you not aware that whatever enters into the mouth passes through the stomach and is discharged into the sewer?
18 However, whatever comes out of the mouth comes from the heart, and those things defile a man.
19 For example, out of the heart come wicked reasonings, murders, adulteries, sexual immorality, thefts, false testimonies, blasphemies.
20 These are the things that defile a man; but to take a meal with unwashed hands does not defile a man.”
21 Leaving there, Jesus now went into the region of Tyre and Siʹdon.
22 And look! a Phoe·niʹcian woman from that region came and cried out: “Have mercy on me, Lord, Son of David. My daughter is cruelly demon possessed.”
23 But he did not say a word in answer to her. So his disciples came and began to urge him: “Send her away, because she keeps crying out after us.”
24 He answered: “I was not sent to anyone except to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.”
25 But the woman came and did obeisance to him, saying: “Lord, help me!”
26 In answer he said: “It is not right to take the bread of the children and throw it to the little dogs.”
27 She said: “Yes, Lord, but really the little dogs do eat of the crumbs falling from the table of their masters.”
28 Then Jesus replied to her: “O woman, great is your faith; let it happen to you as you wish.” And her daughter was healed from that hour on.
29 Departing from there, Jesus next came near the Sea of Galʹi·lee, and after going up on the mountain, he was sitting there.
30 Then large crowds approached him, bringing along people who were lame, maimed, blind, speechless, and many others, and they laid them at his feet, and he cured them.
31 So the crowd felt amazement as they saw the speechless speaking and the maimed being made sound and the lame walking and the blind seeing, and they glorified the God of Israel.
32 But Jesus called his disciples to him and said: “I feel pity for the crowd, because they have already stayed with me for three days and they have had nothing to eat. I do not want to send them away hungry, for they may give out on the road.”
33 However, the disciples said to him: “Where in this isolated place are we going to get enough bread to satisfy a crowd of this size?”
34 At this Jesus said to them: “How many loaves do you have?” They said: “Seven, and a few small fish.”
35 So after instructing the crowd to recline on the ground,
36 he took the seven loaves and the fish, and after offering thanks, he broke them and began giving them to the disciples, and the disciples gave them to the crowds.
37 And all ate and were satisfied, and they took up seven large baskets full of leftover fragments.
38 Now those eating were 4,000 men, as well as women and young children.
39 Finally, after sending the crowds away, he got into the boat and came into the region of Magʹa·dan.
16 Here the Pharisees and Sadducees approached him, and to test him, they asked him to display to them a sign from heaven.
2 In reply he said to them: “When evening falls, you say, ‘It will be fair weather, for the sky is fire-red,’
3 and in the morning, ‘It will be wintry, rainy weather today, for the sky is fire-red but gloomy.’ You know how to interpret the appearance of the sky, but the signs of the times you cannot interpret.
4 A wicked and adulterous generation keeps seeking a sign, but no sign will be given it except the sign of Joʹnah.” With that he went away, leaving them behind.
5 Now the disciples crossed to the other side and forgot to take bread along.
6 Jesus said to them: “Keep your eyes open and watch out for the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.”
7 So they began to reason among themselves, saying: “We did not take any loaves along.”
8 Knowing this, Jesus said: “Why are you discussing among yourselves that you have no loaves, you with little faith?
9 Do you not yet see the point, or do you not remember the five loaves in the case of the 5,000 and how many baskets you took up?
10 Or the seven loaves in the case of the 4,000 and how many large baskets you took up?
11 How is it you do not discern that I did not speak to you about bread? But watch out for the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.”
12 Then they grasped that he said to watch out, not for the leaven of bread, but for the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
13 When he had come into the region of Caes·a·reʹa Phi·lipʹpi, Jesus asked his disciples: “Who are men saying the Son of man is?”
14 They said: “Some say John the Baptist, others E·liʹjah, and still others Jeremiah or one of the prophets.”
15 He said to them: “You, though, who do you say I am?”
16 Simon Peter answered: “You are the Christ, the Son of the living God.”
17 In response Jesus said to him: “Happy you are, Simon son of Joʹnah, because flesh and blood did not reveal it to you, but my Father in the heavens did.
18 Also, I say to you: You are Peter, and on this rock I will build my congregation, and the gates of the Grave will not overpower it.
19 I will give you the keys of the Kingdom of the heavens, and whatever you may bind on earth will already be bound in the heavens, and whatever you may loosen on earth will already be loosened in the heavens.”
20 Then he sternly instructed the disciples not to tell anybody that he was the Christ.
21 From that time forward, Jesus began explaining to his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer many things from the elders and chief priests and scribes and be killed, and on the third day be raised up.
22 At this Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him, saying: “Be kind to yourself, Lord; you will not have this happen to you at all.”
23 But turning his back, he said to Peter: “Get behind me, Satan! You are a stumbling block to me, because you think, not God’s thoughts, but those of men.”
24 Then Jesus said to his disciples: “If anyone wants to come after me, let him disown himself and pick up his torture stake and keep following me.
25 For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake will find it.
26 Really, what good will it do a man if he gains the whole world but loses his life? Or what will a man give in exchange for his life?
27 For the Son of man is to come in the glory of his Father with his angels, and then he will repay each one according to his behavior.
28 Truly I say to you that there are some of those standing here who will not taste death at all until first they see the Son of man coming in his Kingdom.”
17 Six days later Jesus took Peter and James and his brother John along and led them up into a lofty mountain by themselves.
2 And he was transfigured before them; his face shone as the sun, and his outer garments became brilliant as the light.
3 And look! there appeared to them Moses and E·liʹjah conversing with him.
4 Then Peter said to Jesus: “Lord, it is fine for us to be here. If you wish, I will erect three tents here, one for you, one for Moses, and one for E·liʹjah.”
5 While he was still speaking, look! a bright cloud overshadowed them, and look! a voice out of the cloud said: “This is my Son, the beloved, whom I have approved. Listen to him.”
6 At hearing this, the disciples fell facedown and became very much afraid.
7 Then Jesus came near, and touching them, he said: “Get up. Have no fear.”
8 When they looked up, they saw no one but Jesus himself.
9 As they were descending from the mountain, Jesus commanded them: “Tell the vision to no one until the Son of man is raised up from the dead.”
10 However, the disciples put the question to him: “Why, then, do the scribes say that E·liʹjah must come first?”
11 In reply he said: “E·liʹjah is indeed coming and will restore all things.
12 However, I say to you that E·liʹjah has already come, and they did not recognize him but did whatever they wanted with him. In this way also, the Son of man is going to suffer at their hands.”
13 Then the disciples perceived that he spoke to them about John the Baptist.
14 When they came toward the crowd, a man approached him, knelt down to him, and said:
15 “Lord, have mercy on my son, because he is an epileptic and is ill. He falls often into the fire and often into the water.
16 I brought him to your disciples, but they could not cure him.”
17 In reply Jesus said: “O faithless and twisted generation, how long must I continue with you? How long must I put up with you? Bring him here to me.”
18 Then Jesus rebuked the demon, and it came out of him, and the boy was cured from that hour.
19 Then the disciples came to Jesus privately and said: “Why could we not expel it?”
20 He said to them: “Because of your little faith. For truly I say to you, if you have faith the size of a mustard grain, you will say to this mountain, ‘Move from here to there,’ and it will move, and nothing will be impossible for you.”
22 It was while they were gathered together in Galʹi·lee that Jesus said to them: “The Son of man is going to be betrayed into men’s hands,
23 and they will kill him, and on the third day he will be raised up.” And they were very much grieved.
24 After they arrived in Ca·perʹna·um, the men collecting the two drachmas tax approached Peter and said: “Does your teacher not pay the two drachmas tax?”
25 He said: “Yes.” However, when he entered the house, Jesus spoke to him first and said: “What do you think, Simon? From whom do the kings of the earth receive duties or head tax? From their sons or from the strangers?”
26 When he said: “From the strangers,” Jesus said to him: “Really, then, the sons are tax-free.
27 But that we do not cause them to stumble, go to the sea, cast a fishhook, and take the first fish that comes up, and when you open its mouth, you will find a silver coin. Take that and give it to them for me and you.”
21 When they got close to Jerusalem and arrived at Bethʹpha·ge on the Mount of Olives, then Jesus sent two disciples,
2 saying to them: “Go into the village that is within sight, and you will at once find a donkey tied and a colt with her. Untie them and bring them to me.
3 If someone says anything to you, you must say, ‘The Lord needs them.’ At that he will immediately send them.”
4 This actually took place to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet, who said:
5 “Tell the daughter of Zion: ‘Look! Your king is coming to you, mild-tempered and mounted on a donkey, yes, on a colt, the offspring of a beast of burden.’”
6 So the disciples went and did just as Jesus had instructed them.
7 They brought the donkey and its colt, and they put their outer garments on them, and he sat on them.
8 Most of the crowd spread their outer garments on the road, while others were cutting down branches from the trees and spreading them on the road.
9 Moreover, the crowds going ahead of him and those following him kept shouting: “Save, we pray, the Son of David! Blessed is the one who comes in Jehovah’s name! Save him, we pray, in the heights above!”
10 And when he entered Jerusalem, the whole city was in an uproar, saying: “Who is this?”
11 The crowds kept saying: “This is the prophet Jesus, from Nazʹa·reth of Galʹi·lee!”
12 Jesus entered the temple and threw out all those selling and buying in the temple, and he overturned the tables of the money changers and the benches of those selling doves.
13 And he said to them: “It is written, ‘My house will be called a house of prayer,’ but you are making it a cave of robbers.”
14 Also, blind and lame people came to him in the temple, and he cured them.
15 When the chief priests and the scribes saw the marvelous things he did and the boys who were shouting in the temple, “Save, we pray, the Son of David!” they became indignant
16 and said to him: “Do you hear what these are saying?” Jesus said to them: “Yes. Did you never read this, ‘Out of the mouth of children and infants, you have brought forth praise’?”
17 And leaving them behind, he went out of the city to Bethʹa·ny and spent the night there.
18 While returning to the city early in the morning, he felt hungry.
19 He caught sight of a fig tree by the road and went to it, but he found nothing on it except leaves, and he said to it: “Let no fruit come from you ever again.” And the fig tree withered instantly.
20 When the disciples saw this, they were amazed and said: “How is it that the fig tree withered instantly?”
21 In answer Jesus said to them: “Truly I say to you, if you have faith and do not doubt, not only will you do what I did to the fig tree, but even if you say to this mountain, ‘Be lifted up and thrown into the sea,’ it will happen.
22 And all the things you ask in prayer, having faith, you will receive.”
23 After he went into the temple, the chief priests and the elders of the people came up to him while he was teaching and said: “By what authority do you do these things? And who gave you this authority?”
24 In reply Jesus said to them: “I will also ask you one thing. If you tell me, then I will also tell you by what authority I do these things:
25 The baptism by John, from what source was it? From heaven or from men?” But they began to reason among themselves, saying: “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say to us, ‘Why, then, did you not believe him?’
26 But if we say, ‘From men,’ we have the crowd to fear, for they all regard John as a prophet.”
27 So they answered Jesus: “We do not know.” He, in turn, said to them: “Neither am I telling you by what authority I do these things.
28 “What do you think? A man had two children. Going up to the first, he said, ‘Child, go work today in the vineyard.’
29 In answer this one said, ‘I will not,’ but afterward, he felt regret and went out.
30 Approaching the second, he said the same. This one replied, ‘I will, Sir,’ but did not go out.
31 Which of the two did the will of his father?” They said: “The first.” Jesus said to them: “Truly I say to you that the tax collectors and the prostitutes are going ahead of you into the Kingdom of God.
32 For John came to you in a way of righteousness, but you did not believe him. However, the tax collectors and the prostitutes believed him, and even when you saw this, you did not feel regret afterward so as to believe him.
33 “Hear another illustration: There was a man, a landowner, who planted a vineyard and put a fence around it and dug a winepress in it and erected a tower; then he leased it to cultivators and traveled abroad.
34 When the fruit season came around, he sent his slaves to the cultivators to collect his fruit.
35 However, the cultivators took his slaves, and they beat one up, another they killed, another they stoned.
36 Again he sent other slaves, more than the first group, but they did the same to these.
37 Lastly he sent his son to them, saying, ‘They will respect my son.’
38 On seeing the son, the cultivators said among themselves, ‘This is the heir. Come, let us kill him and get his inheritance!’
39 So they took him and threw him out of the vineyard and killed him.
40 Therefore, when the owner of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those cultivators?”
41 They said to him: “Because they are evil, he will bring a terrible destruction on them and will lease the vineyard to other cultivators, who will give him the fruits when they become due.”
42 Jesus said to them: “Did you never read in the Scriptures, ‘The stone that the builders rejected, this has become the chief cornerstone. This has come from Jehovah, and it is marvelous in our eyes’?
43 This is why I say to you, the Kingdom of God will be taken from you and be given to a nation producing its fruits.
44 Also, the person falling on this stone will be shattered. As for anyone on whom it falls, it will crush him.”
45 When the chief priests and the Pharisees heard his illustrations, they knew that he was speaking about them.
46 Although they wanted to seize him, they feared the crowds, because these regarded him as a prophet.
22 Once more Jesus spoke to them with illustrations, saying:
2 “The Kingdom of the heavens may be likened to a king who made a marriage feast for his son.
3 And he sent his slaves to call those invited to the marriage feast, but they were unwilling to come.
4 Again he sent other slaves, saying, ‘Tell those invited: “Look! I have prepared my dinner, my bulls and fattened animals are slaughtered, and everything is ready. Come to the marriage feast.”’
5 But unconcerned they went off, one to his own field, another to his business;
6 but the rest, seizing his slaves, treated them insolently and killed them.
7 “The king grew wrathful and sent his armies and killed those murderers and burned their city.
8 Then he said to his slaves, ‘The marriage feast is ready, but those invited were not worthy.
9 Therefore, go to the roads leading out of the city, and invite anyone you find to the marriage feast.’
10 Accordingly, those slaves went out to the roads and gathered all they found, both wicked and good; and the room for the wedding ceremonies was filled with those dining.
11 “When the king came in to inspect the guests, he caught sight of a man not wearing a marriage garment.
12 So he said to him, ‘Fellow, how did you get in here without a marriage garment?’ He was speechless.
13 Then the king said to his servants, ‘Bind him hand and foot and throw him into the darkness outside. There is where his weeping and the gnashing of his teeth will be.’
14 “For there are many invited, but few chosen.”
15 Then the Pharisees went and conspired together in order to trap him in his speech.
16 So they sent their disciples to him, together with party followers of Herod, saying: “Teacher, we know you are truthful and teach the way of God in truth, and you do not seek anyone’s favor, for you do not look at the outward appearance of people.
17 Tell us, then, what do you think? Is it lawful to pay head tax to Caesar or not?”
18 But Jesus, knowing their wickedness, said: “Why do you put me to the test, hypocrites?
19 Show me the tax coin.” They brought him a de·narʹi·us.
20 He said to them: “Whose image and inscription is this?”
21 They said: “Caesar’s.” Then he said to them: “Pay back, therefore, Caesar’s things to Caesar, but God’s things to God.”
22 When they heard that, they were amazed, and they left him and went away.
23 On that day the Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came and asked him:
24 “Teacher, Moses said: ‘If any man dies without having children, his brother must marry his wife and raise up offspring for his brother.’
25 Now there were seven brothers with us. The first married and died, and having no offspring, he left his wife for his brother.
26 The same thing happened with the second and the third, through all seven.
27 Last of all, the woman died.
28 So in the resurrection, of the seven, whose wife will she be? For they all had her as a wife.”
29 In reply Jesus said to them: “You are mistaken, because you know neither the Scriptures nor the power of God;
30 for in the resurrection neither do men marry nor are women given in marriage, but they are as angels in heaven.
31 Regarding the resurrection of the dead, have you not read what was spoken to you by God, who said:
32 ‘I am the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob’? He is the God, not of the dead, but of the living.”
33 On hearing that, the crowds were astounded at his teaching.
34 After the Pharisees heard that he had silenced the Sadducees, they came together in one group.
35 And one of them, versed in the Law, tested him by asking:
36 “Teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the Law?”
37 He said to him: “‘You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind.’
38 This is the greatest and first commandment.
39 The second, like it, is this: ‘You must love your neighbor as yourself.’
40 On these two commandments the whole Law hangs, and the Prophets.”
41 Now while the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them:
42 “What do you think about the Christ? Whose son is he?” They said to him: “David’s.”
43 He asked them: “How is it, then, that David under inspiration calls him Lord, saying,
44 ‘Jehovah said to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand until I put your enemies beneath your feet”’?
45 If, then, David calls him Lord, how is he his son?”
46 And nobody was able to say a word in reply to him, and from that day on, no one dared to question him any further.
23 Then Jesus spoke to the crowds and to his disciples, saying:
2 “The scribes and the Pharisees have seated themselves in the seat of Moses.
3 Therefore, all the things they tell you, do and observe, but do not do according to their deeds, for they say but they do not practice what they say.
4 They bind up heavy loads and put them on the shoulders of men, but they themselves are not willing to budge them with their finger.
5 All the works they do, they do to be seen by men, for they broaden the scripture-containing cases that they wear as safeguards and lengthen the fringes of their garments.
6 They like the most prominent place at evening meals and the front seats in the synagogues
7 and the greetings in the marketplaces and to be called Rabbi by men.
8 But you, do not you be called Rabbi, for one is your Teacher, and all of you are brothers.
9 Moreover, do not call anyone your father on earth, for one is your Father, the heavenly One.
10 Neither be called leaders, for your Leader is one, the Christ.
11 But the greatest one among you must be your minister.
12 Whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.
13 “Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you shut up the Kingdom of the heavens before men; for you yourselves do not go in, neither do you permit those on their way in to go in.
15 “Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you travel over sea and dry land to make one proselyte, and when he becomes one, you make him a subject for Ge·henʹna twice as much so as yourselves.
16 “Woe to you, blind guides, who say, ‘If anyone swears by the temple, it is nothing; but if anyone swears by the gold of the temple, he is under obligation.’
17 Fools and blind ones! Which, in fact, is greater, the gold or the temple that has sanctified the gold?
18 Moreover, ‘If anyone swears by the altar, it is nothing; but if anyone swears by the gift on it, he is under obligation.’
19 Blind ones! Which, in fact, is greater, the gift or the altar that sanctifies the gift?
20 Therefore, whoever swears by the altar is swearing by it and by all the things on it;
21 and whoever swears by the temple is swearing by it and by the One inhabiting it;
22 and whoever swears by heaven is swearing by the throne of God and by the One sitting on it.
23 “Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you give the tenth of the mint and the dill and the cumin, but you have disregarded the weightier matters of the Law, namely, justice and mercy and faithfulness. These things it was necessary to do, yet not to disregard the other things.
24 Blind guides, who strain out the gnat but gulp down the camel!
25 “Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you cleanse the outside of the cup and of the dish, but inside they are full of greediness and self-indulgence.
26 Blind Pharisee, cleanse first the inside of the cup and of the dish, so that the outside of it may also become clean.
27 “Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you resemble whitewashed graves, which outwardly indeed appear beautiful but inside are full of dead men’s bones and of every sort of uncleanness.
28 In the same way, on the outside you appear righteous to men, but inside you are full of hypocrisy and lawlessness.
29 “Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you build the graves of the prophets and decorate the tombs of the righteous ones,
30 and you say, ‘If we had lived in the days of our forefathers, we would not have shared with them in shedding the blood of the prophets.’
31 Therefore, you are testifying against yourselves that you are sons of those who murdered the prophets.
32 Well, then, fill up the measure of your forefathers.
33 “Serpents, offspring of vipers, how will you flee from the judgment of Ge·henʹna?
34 For this reason, I am sending to you prophets and wise men and public instructors. Some of them you will kill and execute on stakes, and some of them you will scourge in your synagogues and persecute from city to city,
35 so that there may come upon you all the righteous blood spilled on earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zech·a·riʹah son of Bar·a·chiʹah, whom you murdered between the sanctuary and the altar.
36 Truly I say to you, all these things will come upon this generation.
37 “Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the killer of the prophets and stoner of those sent to her—how often I wanted to gather your children together the way a hen gathers her chicks under her wings! But you did not want it.
38 Look! Your house is abandoned to you.
39 For I say to you, you will by no means see me from now until you say, ‘Blessed is the one who comes in Jehovah’s name!’”
24 Now as Jesus was departing from the temple, his disciples approached to show him the buildings of the temple.
2 In response he said to them: “Do you not see all these things? Truly I say to you, by no means will a stone be left here upon a stone and not be thrown down.”
3 While he was sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples approached him privately, saying: “Tell us, when will these things be, and what will be the sign of your presence and of the conclusion of the system of things?”
4 In answer Jesus said to them: “Look out that nobody misleads you,
5 for many will come on the basis of my name, saying, ‘I am the Christ,’ and will mislead many.
6 You are going to hear of wars and reports of wars. See that you are not alarmed, for these things must take place, but the end is not yet.
7 “For nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be food shortages and earthquakes in one place after another.
8 All these things are a beginning of pangs of distress.
9 “Then people will hand you over to tribulation and will kill you, and you will be hated by all the nations on account of my name.
10 Then, too, many will be stumbled and will betray one another and will hate one another.
11 Many false prophets will arise and mislead many;
12 and because of the increasing of lawlessness, the love of the greater number will grow cold.
13 But the one who has endured to the end will be saved.
14 And this good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come.
15 “Therefore, when you catch sight of the disgusting thing that causes desolation, as spoken about by Daniel the prophet, standing in a holy place (let the reader use discernment),
16 then let those in Ju·deʹa begin fleeing to the mountains.
17 Let the man on the housetop not come down to take the goods out of his house,
18 and let the man in the field not return to pick up his outer garment.
19 Woe to the pregnant women and those nursing a baby in those days!
20 Keep praying that your flight may not occur in wintertime nor on the Sabbath day;
21 for then there will be great tribulation such as has not occurred since the world’s beginning until now, no, nor will occur again.
22 In fact, unless those days were cut short, no flesh would be saved; but on account of the chosen ones those days will be cut short.
23 “Then if anyone says to you, ‘Look! Here is the Christ,’ or, ‘There!’ do not believe it.
24 For false Christs and false prophets will arise and will perform great signs and wonders so as to mislead, if possible, even the chosen ones.
25 Look! I have forewarned you.
26 Therefore, if people say to you, ‘Look! He is in the wilderness,’ do not go out; ‘Look! He is in the inner rooms,’ do not believe it.
27 For just as the lightning comes out of the east and shines over to the west, so the presence of the Son of man will be.
28 Wherever the carcass is, there the eagles will be gathered together.
29 “Immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light, and the stars will fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
30 Then the sign of the Son of man will appear in heaven, and all the tribes of the earth will beat themselves in grief, and they will see the Son of man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.
31 And he will send out his angels with a great trumpet sound, and they will gather his chosen ones together from the four winds, from one extremity of the heavens to their other extremity.
32 “Now learn this illustration from the fig tree: Just as soon as its young branch grows tender and sprouts its leaves, you know that summer is near.
33 Likewise also you, when you see all these things, know that he is near at the doors.
34 Truly I say to you that this generation will by no means pass away until all these things happen.
35 Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will by no means pass away.
36 “Concerning that day and hour nobody knows, neither the angels of the heavens nor the Son, but only the Father.
37 For just as the days of Noah were, so the presence of the Son of man will be.
38 For as they were in those days before the Flood, eating and drinking, men marrying and women being given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark,
39 and they took no note until the Flood came and swept them all away, so the presence of the Son of man will be.
40 Then two men will be in the field; one will be taken along and the other abandoned.
41 Two women will be grinding at the hand mill; one will be taken along and the other abandoned.
42 Keep on the watch, therefore, because you do not know on what day your Lord is coming.
43 “But know one thing: If the householder had known in what watch the thief was coming, he would have kept awake and not allowed his house to be broken into.
44 On this account, you too prove yourselves ready, because the Son of man is coming at an hour that you do not think to be it.
45 “Who really is the faithful and discreet slave whom his master appointed over his domestics, to give them their food at the proper time?
46 Happy is that slave if his master on coming finds him doing so!
47 Truly I say to you, he will appoint him over all his belongings.
48 “But if ever that evil slave says in his heart, ‘My master is delaying,’
49 and he starts to beat his fellow slaves and to eat and drink with the confirmed drunkards,
50 the master of that slave will come on a day that he does not expect and in an hour that he does not know,
51 and he will punish him with the greatest severity and will assign him his place with the hypocrites. There is where his weeping and the gnashing of his teeth will be.
25 “Then the Kingdom of the heavens may be likened to ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom.
2 Five of them were foolish, and five were discreet.
3 For the foolish took their lamps but took no oil with them,
4 whereas the discreet took oil in their flasks along with their lamps.
5 While the bridegroom was delaying, they all became drowsy and fell asleep.
6 Right in the middle of the night there was a shout: ‘Here is the bridegroom! Go out to meet him.’
7 Then all those virgins got up and put their lamps in order.
8 The foolish said to the discreet, ‘Give us some of your oil, because our lamps are about to go out.’
9 The discreet answered, saying: ‘Perhaps there may not be enough for both us and you. Go instead to those who sell it, and buy some for yourselves.’
10 While they were going off to buy it, the bridegroom came. The virgins who were ready went in with him to the marriage feast, and the door was shut.
11 Afterward, the rest of the virgins also came, saying, ‘Sir, Sir, open to us!’
12 In answer he said, ‘I tell you the truth, I do not know you.’
13 “Keep on the watch, therefore, because you know neither the day nor the hour.
14 “For it is just like a man about to travel abroad who summoned his slaves and entrusted his belongings to them.
15 He gave five talents to one, two to another, and one to still another, to each according to his own ability, and he went abroad.
16 Immediately the one who received the five talents went and did business with them and gained five more.
17 Likewise, the one who received the two gained two more.
18 But the slave who received just one went off and dug in the ground and hid his master’s money.
19 “After a long time, the master of those slaves came and settled accounts with them.
20 So the one who had received the five talents came forward and brought five additional talents, saying, ‘Master, you entrusted five talents to me; see, I gained five talents more.’
21 His master said to him: ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things. I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’
22 Next the one who had received the two talents came forward and said, ‘Master, you entrusted two talents to me; see, I gained two talents more.’
23 His master said to him: ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things. I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’
24 “Finally the slave who had received the one talent came forward and said: ‘Master, I knew you to be a demanding man, reaping where you did not sow and gathering where you did not winnow.
25 So I grew afraid and went and hid your talent in the ground. Here, you have what is yours.’
26 In reply his master said to him: ‘Wicked and sluggish slave, you knew, did you, that I reaped where I did not sow and gathered where I did not winnow?
27 Well, then, you should have deposited my money with the bankers, and on my coming I would have received it back with interest.
28 “‘Therefore, take the talent away from him and give it to the one who has the ten talents.
29 For to everyone who has, more will be given, and he will have an abundance. But the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him.
30 And throw the good-for-nothing slave out into the darkness outside. There is where his weeping and the gnashing of his teeth will be.’
31 “When the Son of man comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, then he will sit down on his glorious throne.
32 All the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate people one from another, just as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.
33 And he will put the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on his left.
34 “Then the King will say to those on his right: ‘Come, you who have been blessed by my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the founding of the world.
35 For I became hungry and you gave me something to eat; I was thirsty and you gave me something to drink. I was a stranger and you received me hospitably;
36 naked and you clothed me. I fell sick and you looked after me. I was in prison and you visited me.’
37 Then the righteous ones will answer him with the words: ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you something to drink?
38 When did we see you a stranger and receive you hospitably, or naked and clothe you?
39 When did we see you sick or in prison and visit you?’
40 In reply the King will say to them, ‘Truly I say to you, to the extent that you did it to one of the least of these my brothers, you did it to me.’
41 “Then he will say to those on his left: ‘Go away from me, you who have been cursed, into the everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his angels.
42 For I became hungry, but you gave me nothing to eat; and I was thirsty, but you gave me nothing to drink.
43 I was a stranger, but you did not receive me hospitably; naked, but you did not clothe me; sick and in prison, but you did not look after me.’
44 Then they too will answer with the words: ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison and did not minister to you?’
45 Then he will answer them, saying: ‘Truly I say to you, to the extent that you did not do it to one of these least ones, you did not do it to me.’
46 These will depart into everlasting cutting-off, but the righteous ones into everlasting life.”
2 However, after some days he again entered into Ca·perʹna·um, and the word spread that he was at home.
2 And so many gathered that there was no more room, not even around the door, and he began to speak the word to them.
3 And they brought him a paralytic carried by four men.
4 But they could not bring him right to Jesus because of the crowd, so they removed the roof above Jesus, and after digging an opening, they lowered the stretcher on which the paralytic was lying.
5 When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the paralytic: “Child, your sins are forgiven.”
6 Now some of the scribes were there, sitting and reasoning in their hearts:
7 “Why is this man talking this way? He is blaspheming. Who can forgive sins except one, God?”
8 But immediately Jesus discerned by his spirit that they were reasoning that way among themselves, so he said to them: “Why are you reasoning these things in your hearts?
9 Which is easier, to say to the paralytic, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Get up and pick up your stretcher and walk’?
10 But in order for you to know that the Son of man has authority to forgive sins on earth—” he said to the paralytic:
11 “I say to you, Get up, pick up your stretcher, and go to your home.”
12 At that he got up and immediately picked up his stretcher and walked out in front of them all. So they were all astonished, and they glorified God, saying: “We have never seen anything like this.”
13 Again he went out alongside the sea, and all the crowd kept coming to him, and he began to teach them.
14 And as he was passing by, he caught sight of Leʹvi the son of Al·phaeʹus sitting at the tax office, and he said to him: “Be my follower.” At that he rose up and followed him.
15 Later he was dining in his house, and many tax collectors and sinners were dining with Jesus and his disciples, for there were many of them who were following him.
16 But when the scribes of the Pharisees saw that he was eating with the sinners and tax collectors, they began saying to his disciples: “Does he eat with tax collectors and sinners?”
17 On hearing this, Jesus said to them: “Those who are strong do not need a physician, but those who are ill do. I came to call, not righteous people, but sinners.”
18 Now John’s disciples and the Pharisees practiced fasting. So they came and said to him: “Why do John’s disciples and the disciples of the Pharisees practice fasting, but your disciples do not practice fasting?”
19 So Jesus said to them: “While the bridegroom is with them, the friends of the bridegroom have no reason to fast, do they? As long as they have the bridegroom with them, they cannot fast.
20 But days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then they will fast on that day.
21 Nobody sews a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old outer garment. If he does, the new piece pulls away from the old, and the tear becomes worse.
22 Also, no one puts new wine into old wineskins. If he does, the wine will burst the skins, and the wine is lost as well as the skins. But new wine is put into new wineskins.”
23 Now as he was passing through the grainfields on the Sabbath, his disciples started to pluck the heads of grain as they went.
24 So the Pharisees said to him: “Look here! Why are they doing what is not lawful on the Sabbath?”
25 But he said to them: “Have you never read what David did when he was in need and he and the men with him were hungry?
26 How, in the account about A·biʹa·thar the chief priest, he entered into the house of God and ate the loaves of presentation, which it is not lawful for anybody to eat except the priests, and he also gave some to the men who were with him?”
27 Then he said to them: “The Sabbath came into existence for the sake of man, and not man for the sake of the Sabbath.
28 So the Son of man is Lord even of the Sabbath.”
7 Now the Pharisees and some of the scribes who had come from Jerusalem gathered around him.
2 And they saw some of his disciples eat their meal with defiled hands, that is, unwashed ones.
3 (For the Pharisees and all the Jews do not eat unless they wash their hands up to the elbow, clinging to the tradition of the men of former times,
4 and when they come from the market, they do not eat unless they wash themselves. There are many other traditions that they have received and cling to, such as baptisms of cups, pitchers, and copper vessels.)
5 So these Pharisees and scribes asked him: “Why do your disciples not observe the tradition of the men of former times, but they eat their meal with defiled hands?”
6 He said to them: “Isaiah aptly prophesied about you hypocrites, as it is written, ‘This people honor me with their lips, but their hearts are far removed from me.
7 It is in vain that they keep worshipping me, for they teach commands of men as doctrines.’
8 You let go of the commandment of God and cling to the tradition of men.”
9 Further, he said to them: “You skillfully disregard the commandment of God in order to keep your tradition.
10 For example, Moses said, ‘Honor your father and your mother,’ and, ‘Let the one who speaks abusively of his father or mother be put to death.’
11 But you say, ‘If a man says to his father or his mother: “Whatever I have that could benefit you is corban (that is, a gift dedicated to God),”’
12 you no longer let him do a single thing for his father or his mother.
13 Thus you make the word of God invalid by your tradition that you have handed down. And you do many things like this.”
14 So calling the crowd to him again, he said to them: “Listen to me, all of you, and understand the meaning.
15 Nothing from outside a man that enters into him can defile him; but the things that come out of a man are the things that defile him.”
17 Now when he had entered a house away from the crowd, his disciples began to question him about the illustration.
18 So he said to them: “Are you also without understanding like them? Are you not aware that nothing from outside that enters into a man can defile him,
19 since it enters, not into his heart, but into his stomach, and it passes out into the sewer?” Thus he declared all foods clean.
20 Further, he said: “That which comes out of a man is what defiles him.
21 For from inside, out of the heart of men, come injurious reasonings, sexual immorality, thefts, murders,
22 acts of adultery, greed, acts of wickedness, deceit, brazen conduct, an envious eye, blasphemy, haughtiness, and unreasonableness.
23 All these wicked things come from within and defile a man.”
24 He rose up from there and went into the region of Tyre and Siʹdon. There he entered into a house and did not want anyone to know it, but he could not escape notice.
25 Immediately, a woman whose little daughter had an unclean spirit heard about him and came and fell down at his feet.
26 The woman was a Greek, a Sy·ro·phoe·niʹcian by nationality; and she kept asking him to expel the demon from her daughter.
27 But he said to her: “First let the children be satisfied, for it is not right to take the bread of the children and throw it to the little dogs.”
28 But she replied to him: “Yes, sir, and yet even the little dogs underneath the table eat of the crumbs of the little children.”
29 At that he said to her: “Because you said this, go; the demon has gone out of your daughter.”
30 So she went away to her home and found the young child lying on the bed, and the demon was gone.
31 When Jesus returned from the region of Tyre, he went through Siʹdon to the Sea of Galʹi·lee, through the region of De·capʹo·lis.
32 Here they brought him a deaf man with a speech impediment, and they pleaded with him to lay his hand on him.
33 And he took him aside privately, away from the crowd. Then he put his fingers into the man’s ears, and after spitting, he touched his tongue.
34 And looking up into heaven, he sighed deeply and said to him: “Ephʹpha·tha,” that is, “Be opened.”
35 At this his ears were opened, and his speech impediment was removed, and he began speaking normally.
36 With that he ordered them not to tell anyone, but the more he would order them, the more they would proclaim it.
37 Indeed, they were astounded beyond measure, and they said: “He has done all things well. He even makes the deaf hear and the speechless speak.”
9 Furthermore, he said to them: “Truly I say to you that there are some of those standing here who will not taste death at all until first they see the Kingdom of God already having come in power.”
2 Six days later Jesus took Peter and James and John along and led them up into a lofty mountain by themselves. And he was transfigured before them;
3 his outer garments began to glisten, becoming far whiter than any clothes cleaner on earth could whiten them.
4 Also, E·liʹjah with Moses appeared to them, and they were conversing with Jesus.
5 Then Peter said to Jesus: “Rabbi, it is fine for us to be here. So let us erect three tents, one for you, one for Moses, and one for E·liʹjah.”
6 In fact, he did not know how to react, for they were quite fearful.
7 And a cloud formed, overshadowing them, and a voice came out of the cloud: “This is my Son, the beloved. Listen to him.”
8 Then suddenly they looked around and saw that no one was with them any longer except Jesus.
9 As they were coming down from the mountain, he strictly ordered them not to relate to anybody what they had seen until after the Son of man had risen from the dead.
10 They took the word to heart, but discussed among themselves what this rising from the dead meant.
11 And they began to question him, saying: “Why do the scribes say that E·liʹjah must come first?”
12 He said to them: “E·liʹjah does come first and restore all things; but how is it that it is written about the Son of man that he must undergo many sufferings and be treated with contempt?
13 But I say to you that E·liʹjah, in fact, has come, and they did to him whatever they wanted, just as it is written about him.”
14 When they came to the other disciples, they noticed a large crowd around them, and there were scribes arguing with them.
15 But as soon as all the crowd caught sight of him, they were astonished, and they ran up to him to greet him.
16 So he asked them: “What are you arguing about with them?”
17 And one of the crowd answered him: “Teacher, I brought my son to you because he has a speechless spirit.
18 Wherever it seizes him, it throws him to the ground, and he foams at the mouth and grinds his teeth and loses his strength. I asked your disciples to expel it, but they were not able to do so.”
19 In response he said to them: “O faithless generation, how long must I continue with you? How long must I put up with you? Bring him to me.”
20 So they brought the boy to him, but at the sight of him, the spirit at once threw the child into convulsions. After falling on the ground, he kept rolling about, foaming at the mouth.
21 Then Jesus asked the father: “How long has this been happening to him?” He said: “From childhood on,
22 and often it would throw him into the fire and also into the water to destroy him. But if you can do anything, have pity on us and help us.”
23 Jesus said to him: “That expression, ‘If you can’! Why, all things are possible for the one who has faith.”
24 Immediately the child’s father cried out and said: “I have faith! Help me out where I need faith!”
25 Jesus, now noticing that a crowd was rushing toward them, rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to it: “You speechless and deaf spirit, I order you, get out of him and do not enter into him again!”
26 After crying out and going through many convulsions, it came out, and the child seemed to be dead, so that most of the people were saying: “He is dead!”
27 But Jesus took him by the hand and raised him up, and he stood up.
28 So after he entered into a house, his disciples asked him privately: “Why could we not expel it?”
29 He said to them: “This kind can come out only by prayer.”
30 They departed from there and went through Galʹi·lee, but he did not want anyone to get to know about it.
31 For he was teaching his disciples and telling them: “The Son of man is going to be betrayed into men’s hands, and they will kill him, but despite being killed, he will rise three days later.”
32 However, they did not understand his statement, and they were afraid to question him.
33 And they came into Ca·perʹna·um. Now when he was inside the house, he put the question to them: “What were you arguing about on the road?”
34 They kept silent, for on the road they had been arguing among themselves about who is greater.
35 So he sat down and called the Twelve and said to them: “If anyone wants to be first, he must be last of all and minister of all.”
36 Then he took a young child and stood him in their midst; and putting his arms around him, he said to them:
37 “Whoever receives one of such young children on the basis of my name receives me also; and whoever receives me receives not me only but also Him who sent me.”
38 John said to him: “Teacher, we saw someone expelling demons by using your name, and we tried to prevent him, because he was not following us.”
39 But Jesus said: “Do not try to prevent him, for there is no one who will do a powerful work on the basis of my name who will quickly be able to say anything bad about me.
40 For whoever is not against us is for us.
41 And whoever gives you a cup of water to drink because you belong to Christ, I tell you truly, he will by no means lose his reward.
42 But whoever stumbles one of these little ones who have faith, it would be better for him if a millstone that is turned by a donkey were put around his neck and he were pitched into the sea.
43 “If ever your hand makes you stumble, cut it off. It is better for you to enter into life maimed than to go off with two hands into Ge·henʹna, into the fire that cannot be put out.
45 And if your foot makes you stumble, cut it off. It is better for you to enter into life lame than to be thrown with two feet into Ge·henʹna.
47 And if your eye makes you stumble, throw it away. It is better for you to enter one-eyed into the Kingdom of God than to be thrown with two eyes into Ge·henʹna,
48 where the maggot does not die and the fire is not put out.
49 “For everyone must be salted with fire.
50 Salt is fine, but if the salt ever loses its saltiness, with what will you season it? Have salt in yourselves, and keep peace with one another.”
11 Now when they were getting near to Jerusalem, to Bethʹpha·ge and Bethʹa·ny at the Mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples
2 and told them: “Go into the village that is within sight, and as soon as you enter it, you will find a colt tied on which no man has sat until now. Untie it and bring it here.
3 And if anyone says to you, ‘Why are you doing this?’ say, ‘The Lord needs it and will send it back here right away.’”
4 So they went away and found the colt tied at a door, outside on the side street, and they untied it.
5 But some of those standing there said to them: “What are you doing untying the colt?”
6 They told them just what Jesus had said, and they let them go.
7 And they brought the colt to Jesus, and they put their outer garments on it, and he sat on it.
8 Also, many spread their outer garments on the road, but others cut down foliage from the fields.
9 And those going in front and those coming behind kept shouting: “Save, we pray! Blessed is the one who comes in Jehovah’s name!
10 Blessed is the coming Kingdom of our father David! Save, we pray, in the heights above!”
11 And he entered Jerusalem and went into the temple, and he looked around at everything, but since the hour was already late, he went out to Bethʹa·ny with the Twelve.
12 The next day when they were leaving Bethʹa·ny, he felt hungry.
13 From a distance he caught sight of a fig tree that had leaves, and he went to see whether he could find something on it. But on coming to it, he found nothing but leaves, for it was not the season for figs.
14 So he said to it: “Let no one eat fruit from you ever again.” And his disciples were listening.
15 They now came to Jerusalem. There he entered the temple and started to throw out those selling and buying in the temple, and he overturned the tables of the money changers and the benches of those selling doves,
16 and he would not let anyone carry a utensil through the temple.
17 He was teaching and saying to them: “Is it not written, ‘My house will be called a house of prayer for all the nations’? But you have made it a cave of robbers.”
18 And the chief priests and the scribes heard it, and they began to seek how to kill him; for they were in fear of him, because all the crowd was astounded at his teaching.
19 When it became late in the day, they went out of the city.
20 But when they were passing by early in the morning, they saw the fig tree already withered from its roots.
21 Peter, remembering it, said to him: “Rabbi, see! the fig tree that you cursed has withered.”
22 In reply Jesus said to them: “Have faith in God.
23 Truly I say to you that whoever tells this mountain, ‘Be lifted up and thrown into the sea,’ and does not doubt in his heart but has faith that what he says is going to happen, he will have it happen.
24 This is why I tell you, all the things you pray and ask for, have faith that you have received them, and you will have them.
25 And when you stand praying, forgive whatever you have against anyone, so that your Father who is in the heavens may also forgive you your trespasses.”
27 They came again to Jerusalem. And as he was walking in the temple, the chief priests and the scribes and the elders came
28 and said to him: “By what authority do you do these things? Or who gave you this authority to do these things?”
29 Jesus said to them: “I will ask you one question. Answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I do these things.
30 Was the baptism by John from heaven or from men? Answer me.”
31 So they began to reason among themselves, saying: “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say, ‘Why, then, did you not believe him?’
32 But dare we say, ‘From men’?” They were in fear of the crowd, for these all held that John had really been a prophet.
33 So they answered Jesus: “We do not know.” Jesus said to them: “Neither am I telling you by what authority I do these things.”
12 Then he started to speak to them with illustrations: “A man planted a vineyard and put a fence around it and dug a vat for the winepress and erected a tower; then he leased it to cultivators and traveled abroad.
2 In due season he sent a slave to the cultivators to collect some of the fruits of the vineyard from them.
3 But they took him, beat him, and sent him away empty-handed.
4 Again he sent another slave to them, and that one they struck on the head and dishonored.
5 And he sent another, and that one they killed, and many others, some of whom they beat and some of whom they killed.
6 One more he had, a beloved son. He sent him to them last, saying, ‘They will respect my son.’
7 But those cultivators said among themselves, ‘This is the heir. Come, let us kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.’
8 So they took him and killed him and threw him out of the vineyard.
9 What will the owner of the vineyard do? He will come and kill the cultivators and will give the vineyard to others.
10 Did you never read this scripture: ‘The stone that the builders rejected, this has become the chief cornerstone.
11 This has come from Jehovah, and it is marvelous in our eyes’?”
12 At that they wanted to seize him, but they feared the crowd, for they knew that he spoke the illustration with them in mind. So they left him and went away.
13 Next they sent to him some of the Pharisees and of the party followers of Herod in order to catch him in his speech.
14 On arriving, these said to him: “Teacher, we know you are truthful and you do not seek anyone’s favor, for you do not look at the outward appearance of people, but you teach the way of God in line with truth. Is it lawful to pay head tax to Caesar or not?
15 Should we pay, or should we not pay?” Detecting their hypocrisy, he said to them: “Why do you put me to the test? Bring me a de·narʹi·us to look at.”
16 They brought one, and he said to them: “Whose image and inscription is this?” They said to him: “Caesar’s.”
17 Jesus then said: “Pay back Caesar’s things to Caesar, but God’s things to God.” And they were amazed at him.
18 Now the Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came and asked him:
19 “Teacher, Moses wrote us that if someone’s brother dies and leaves a wife behind but does not leave a child, his brother should take the wife and raise up offspring for his brother.
20 There were seven brothers. The first took a wife, but when he died he left no offspring.
21 And the second married her but died without leaving offspring, and the third the same way.
22 And all seven left no offspring. Last of all, the woman also died.
23 In the resurrection, whose wife will she be? For the seven had her as a wife.”
24 Jesus said to them: “Is not this why you are mistaken, because you know neither the Scriptures nor the power of God?
25 For when they rise from the dead, neither do men marry nor are women given in marriage, but they are as angels in the heavens.
26 But concerning the dead being raised up, have you not read in the book of Moses, in the account about the thornbush, that God said to him: ‘I am the God of Abraham and God of Isaac and God of Jacob’?
27 He is a God, not of the dead, but of the living. You are very much mistaken.”
28 One of the scribes who had come up and heard them disputing, knowing that he had answered them in a fine way, asked him: “Which commandment is first of all?”
29 Jesus answered: “The first is, ‘Hear, O Israel, Jehovah our God is one Jehovah,
30 and you must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind and with your whole strength.’
31 The second is this, ‘You must love your neighbor as yourself.’ There is no other commandment greater than these.”
32 The scribe said to him: “Teacher, you spoke well, in line with truth, ‘He is One, and there is no other besides him’;
33 and to love him with one’s whole heart, with one’s whole understanding, and with one’s whole strength and to love one’s neighbor as oneself is worth far more than all the whole burnt offerings and sacrifices.”
34 At this Jesus, discerning that he had answered intelligently, said to him: “You are not far from the Kingdom of God.” But no one had the courage to question him anymore.
35 However, as Jesus continued teaching in the temple, he said: “How is it that the scribes say that the Christ is David’s son?
36 By the holy spirit, David himself said, ‘Jehovah said to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand until I put your enemies beneath your feet.”’
37 David himself calls him Lord, so how can it be that he is his son?” And the large crowd was listening to him with pleasure.
38 And in his teaching he went on to say: “Beware of the scribes who want to walk around in robes and want greetings in the marketplaces
39 and front seats in the synagogues and the most prominent places at evening meals.
40 They devour the houses of the widows, and for show they make long prayers. These will receive a more severe judgment.”
41 And he sat down with the treasury chests in view and began observing how the crowd was dropping money into the treasury chests, and many rich people were dropping in many coins.
42 Now a poor widow came and dropped in two small coins of very little value.
43 So he called his disciples to him and said to them: “Truly I say to you that this poor widow put in more than all the others who put money into the treasury chests.
44 For they all put in out of their surplus, but she, out of her want, put in everything she had, all she had to live on.”
13 As he was going out of the temple, one of his disciples said to him: “Teacher, see! what wonderful stones and buildings!”
2 However, Jesus said to him: “Do you see these great buildings? By no means will a stone be left here upon a stone and not be thrown down.”
3 As he was sitting on the Mount of Olives with the temple in view, Peter, James, John, and Andrew asked him privately:
4 “Tell us, when will these things be, and what will be the sign when all these things are to come to a conclusion?”
5 So Jesus began to tell them: “Look out that nobody misleads you.
6 Many will come on the basis of my name, saying, ‘I am he,’ and will mislead many.
7 Moreover, when you hear of wars and reports of wars, do not be alarmed; these things must take place, but the end is not yet.
8 “For nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom; there will be earthquakes in one place after another; there will also be food shortages. These are a beginning of pangs of distress.
9 “As for you, look out for yourselves. People will hand you over to local courts, and you will be beaten in synagogues and be put on the stand before governors and kings for my sake, for a witness to them.
10 Also, in all the nations, the good news has to be preached first.
11 And when they are taking you to hand you over, do not be anxious beforehand about what to say; but whatever is given you in that hour, say this, for you are not the ones speaking, but the holy spirit is.
12 Furthermore, brother will deliver brother over to death, and a father a child, and children will rise up against parents and have them put to death.
13 And you will be hated by all people on account of my name. But the one who has endured to the end will be saved.
14 “However, when you catch sight of the disgusting thing that causes desolation standing where it should not be (let the reader use discernment), then let those in Ju·deʹa begin fleeing to the mountains.
15 Let the man on the housetop not come down nor go inside to take anything out of his house;
16 and let the man in the field not return to the things behind to pick up his outer garment.
17 Woe to the pregnant women and those nursing a baby in those days!
18 Keep praying that it may not occur in wintertime;
19 for those days will be days of a tribulation such as has not occurred from the beginning of the creation that God created until that time, and will not occur again.
20 In fact, unless Jehovah had cut short the days, no flesh would be saved. But on account of the chosen ones whom he has chosen, he has cut short the days.
21 “Then, too, if anyone says to you, ‘See! Here is the Christ,’ or, ‘See! There he is,’ do not believe it.
22 For false Christs and false prophets will arise and will perform signs and wonders to lead astray, if possible, the chosen ones.
23 You, then, watch out. I have told you all things beforehand.
24 “But in those days, after that tribulation, the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light,
25 and the stars will be falling out of heaven, and the powers that are in the heavens will be shaken.
26 And then they will see the Son of man coming in the clouds with great power and glory.
27 And then he will send out the angels and will gather his chosen ones together from the four winds, from earth’s extremity to heaven’s extremity.
28 “Now learn this illustration from the fig tree: Just as soon as its young branch grows tender and sprouts its leaves, you know that summer is near.
29 Likewise also you, when you see these things happening, know that he is near at the doors.
30 Truly I say to you that this generation will by no means pass away until all these things happen.
31 Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will by no means pass away.
32 “Concerning that day or the hour nobody knows, neither the angels in heaven nor the Son, but the Father.
33 Keep looking, keep awake, for you do not know when the appointed time is.
34 It is like a man traveling abroad who left his house and gave the authority to his slaves, to each one his work, and commanded the doorkeeper to keep on the watch.
35 Keep on the watch, therefore, for you do not know when the master of the house is coming, whether late in the day or at midnight or before dawn or early in the morning,
36 in order that when he comes suddenly, he does not find you sleeping.
37 But what I say to you, I say to all: Keep on the watch.”
15 Immediately at dawn, the chief priests with the elders and the scribes, indeed, the whole Sanʹhe·drin, consulted together, and they bound Jesus and led him off and handed him over to Pilate.
2 So Pilate put the question to him: “Are you the King of the Jews?” In answer he said: “You yourself say it.”
3 But the chief priests were accusing him of many things.
4 Now Pilate began questioning him again, saying: “Have you no reply to make? See how many charges they are bringing against you.”
5 But Jesus made no further answer, so that Pilate was amazed.
6 Well, from festival to festival, he used to release to them one prisoner whom they requested.
7 At the time the man named Bar·abʹbas was in prison with the seditionists, who in their sedition had committed murder.
8 So the crowd came up and began to make their request according to what Pilate used to do for them.
9 He responded to them, saying: “Do you want me to release to you the King of the Jews?”
10 For Pilate was aware that out of envy the chief priests had handed him over.
11 But the chief priests stirred up the crowd to have him release Bar·abʹbas to them instead.
12 Again in reply Pilate said to them: “What, then, should I do with the one you call the King of the Jews?”
13 Once more they cried out: “To the stake with him!”
14 But Pilate went on to say to them: “Why? What bad thing did he do?” Still they cried out all the more: “To the stake with him!”
15 At that Pilate, wishing to satisfy the crowd, released Bar·abʹbas to them; and after having Jesus whipped, he handed him over to be executed on the stake.
16 The soldiers now led him off into the courtyard, that is, into the governor’s residence, and they called the whole body of troops together.
17 And they dressed him in purple and braided a crown of thorns and put it on him;
18 and they began to call out to him: “Greetings, you King of the Jews!”
19 Also, they were hitting him on the head with a reed and spitting on him, and they got on their knees and bowed down to him.
20 Finally, after they had mocked him, they stripped him of the purple and put his outer garments on him. And they led him out to nail him to the stake.
21 Also, they compelled into service a passerby, a certain Simon of Cy·reʹne, coming from the countryside, the father of Alexander and Ruʹfus, to carry his torture stake.
22 So they brought him to the place called Golʹgo·tha, which means, when translated, “Skull Place.”
23 Here they tried to give him wine drugged with myrrh, but he would not take it.
24 And they nailed him to the stake and distributed his outer garments by casting lots over them to decide who would take what.
25 It was now the third hour, and they nailed him to the stake.
26 And the inscription of the charge against him was written: “The King of the Jews.”
27 Moreover, they put two robbers on stakes alongside him, one on his right and one on his left.
29 And those passing by spoke abusively to him, shaking their heads and saying: “Ha! You who would throw down the temple and build it in three days,
30 save yourself by coming down off the torture stake.”
31 In the same way also, the chief priests with the scribes were mocking him among themselves, saying: “Others he saved; himself he cannot save!
32 Let the Christ, the King of Israel, now come down off the torture stake, so that we may see and believe.” Even those who were on stakes alongside him were reproaching him.
33 When it became the sixth hour, a darkness fell over all the land until the ninth hour.
34 And at the ninth hour, Jesus called out with a loud voice: “Eʹli, Eʹli, laʹma sa·bach·thaʹni?” which means, when translated: “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”
35 And some of those standing near, on hearing it, began to say: “See! He is calling E·liʹjah.”
36 Then someone ran, soaked a sponge in sour wine, put it on a reed, and gave it to him to drink, saying: “Let him be! Let us see whether E·liʹjah comes to take him down.”
37 But Jesus let out a loud cry and expired.
38 And the curtain of the sanctuary was torn in two from top to bottom.
39 Now when the army officer who was standing by with him in view saw that he had expired under these circumstances, he said: “Certainly this man was God’s Son.”
40 There were also women watching from a distance, among them Mary Magʹda·lene as well as Mary the mother of James the Less and of Joʹses, and Sa·loʹme,
41 who used to accompany him and minister to him when he was in Galʹi·lee, and many other women who had come up together with him to Jerusalem.
42 Now as it was already late in the afternoon, and since it was Preparation, that is, the day before the Sabbath,
43 there came Joseph of Ar·i·ma·theʹa, a reputable member of the Council, who also himself was waiting for the Kingdom of God. He took courage and went in before Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus.
44 But Pilate wondered whether he could already be dead, and summoning the army officer, he asked him whether Jesus had already died.
45 So after making certain from the army officer, he granted the body to Joseph.
46 After he bought fine linen and took him down, he wrapped him in the fine linen and laid him in a tomb that was quarried out of rock; then he rolled a stone up to the entrance of the tomb.
47 But Mary Magʹda·lene and Mary the mother of Joʹses continued looking at where he had been laid.
16 So when the Sabbath was over, Mary Magʹda·lene, Mary the mother of James, and Sa·loʹme bought spices in order to come and apply them to his body.
2 And very early on the first day of the week when the sun had risen, they came to the tomb.
3 They were saying to one another: “Who will roll the stone away from the entrance of the tomb for us?”
4 But when they looked up, they saw that the stone had been rolled away, although it was very large.
5 When they entered into the tomb, they saw a young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a white robe, and they were stunned.
6 He said to them: “Do not be stunned. You are looking for Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ who was executed on the stake. He was raised up. He is not here. Look, here is the place where they laid him.
7 But go, tell his disciples and Peter, ‘He is going ahead of you into Galʹi·lee. You will see him there, just as he told you.’”
8 So when they came out, they fled from the tomb, trembling and overwhelmed with emotion. And they said nothing to anyone, for they were in fear.
1 Seeing that many have undertaken to compile an account of the facts that are given full credence among us,
2 just as these were handed down to us by those who from the beginning were eyewitnesses and attendants of the message,
3 I resolved also, because I have traced all things from the start with accuracy, to write them to you in logical order, most excellent The·ophʹi·lus,
4 so that you may know fully the certainty of the things that you have been taught orally.
5 In the days of Herod, king of Ju·deʹa, there was a priest named Zech·a·riʹah of the division of A·biʹjah. His wife was from the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth.
6 They both were righteous before God, walking blamelessly in accord with all the commandments and legal requirements of Jehovah.
7 But they had no child, because Elizabeth was barren, and they both were well along in years.
8 Now as he was serving as priest in the assignment of his division before God,
9 according to the established practice of the priesthood it became his turn to offer incense when he entered into the sanctuary of Jehovah.
10 And the entire multitude of the people were praying outside at the hour of offering incense.
11 Jehovah’s angel appeared to him, standing at the right side of the incense altar.
12 But Zech·a·riʹah became troubled at the sight, and he was overcome with fear.
13 However, the angel said to him: “Do not be afraid, Zech·a·riʹah, because your supplication has been favorably heard, and your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son, and you are to name him John.
14 You will have joy and great gladness, and many will rejoice over his birth,
15 for he will be great in the sight of Jehovah. But he must drink no wine or any alcoholic drink at all, and he will be filled with holy spirit even from before birth,
16 and he will turn back many of the sons of Israel to Jehovah their God.
17 Also, he will go ahead of him with E·liʹjah’s spirit and power, to turn back the hearts of fathers to children and the disobedient ones to the practical wisdom of righteous ones, in order to get ready for Jehovah a prepared people.”
18 Zech·a·riʹah said to the angel: “How can I be sure of this? For I am old, and my wife is well along in years.”
19 In reply the angel said to him: “I am Gaʹbri·el, who stands near before God, and I was sent to speak with you and to declare this good news to you.
20 But look! you will be silent and unable to speak until the day these things take place, because you did not believe my words, which will be fulfilled in their appointed time.”
21 Meanwhile, the people continued waiting for Zech·a·riʹah, and they were surprised that he delayed so long in the sanctuary.
22 When he came out, he was unable to speak to them, and they perceived that he had just seen a supernatural sight in the sanctuary. He kept making signs to them but remained speechless.
23 When the days of his holy service were completed, he went off to his home.
24 Some days later Elizabeth his wife became pregnant, and she kept herself secluded for five months, saying:
25 “This is how Jehovah has dealt with me in these days. He has turned his attention to me to take away my reproach among men.”
26 In her sixth month, the angel Gaʹbri·el was sent from God to a city of Galʹi·lee named Nazʹa·reth,
27 to a virgin promised in marriage to a man named Joseph of David’s house, and the name of the virgin was Mary.
28 And coming in, the angel said to her: “Greetings, you highly favored one, Jehovah is with you.”
29 But she was deeply disturbed at his words and tried to understand what kind of greeting this might be.
30 So the angel said to her: “Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God.
31 And look! you will become pregnant and give birth to a son, and you are to name him Jesus.
32 This one will be great and will be called Son of the Most High, and Jehovah God will give him the throne of David his father,
33 and he will rule as King over the house of Jacob forever, and there will be no end to his Kingdom.”
34 But Mary said to the angel: “How is this to be, since I am not having sexual relations with a man?”
35 In answer the angel said to her: “Holy spirit will come upon you, and power of the Most High will overshadow you. And for that reason the one who is born will be called holy, God’s Son.
36 And look! Elizabeth your relative has also conceived a son, in her old age, and this is the sixth month for her, the so-called barren woman;
37 for no declaration will be impossible for God.”
38 Then Mary said: “Look! Jehovah’s slave girl! May it happen to me according to your declaration.” At that the angel departed from her.
39 So Mary set out in those days and traveled with haste into the mountainous country, to a city of Judah,
40 and she entered the home of Zech·a·riʹah and greeted Elizabeth.
41 Well, as Elizabeth heard the greeting of Mary, the infant in her womb leaped, and Elizabeth was filled with holy spirit
42 and loudly cried out: “Blessed are you among women, and blessed is the fruitage of your womb!
43 So how is it that this privilege is mine, to have the mother of my Lord come to me?
44 For look! as the sound of your greeting reached my ears, the infant in my womb leaped for joy.
45 Happy too is she who believed, for there will be a complete fulfillment of those things spoken to her from Jehovah.”
46 And Mary said: “My soul magnifies Jehovah,
47 and my spirit cannot keep from being overjoyed at God my Savior,
48 because he has looked upon the low position of his slave girl. For look! from now on all generations will declare me happy,
49 because the powerful One has done great deeds for me, and holy is his name,
50 and for generation after generation his mercy is upon those who fear him.
51 He has acted mightily with his arm; he has scattered those who are haughty in the intention of their hearts.
52 He has brought down powerful men from thrones and has exalted lowly ones;
53 he has fully satisfied hungry ones with good things and has sent away empty-handed those who had wealth.
54 He has come to the aid of Israel his servant, remembering his mercy,
55 just as he spoke to our forefathers, to Abraham and to his offspring, forever.”
56 Mary stayed with her about three months and then returned to her own home.
57 The time now came for Elizabeth to give birth, and she gave birth to a son.
58 And the neighbors and her relatives heard that Jehovah had magnified his mercy to her, and they rejoiced with her.
59 On the eighth day they came to circumcise the young child, and they were going to name him after his father, Zech·a·riʹah.
60 But his mother said in reply: “No! but he will be called John.”
61 At this they said to her: “Not one of your relatives is called by this name.”
62 Then they asked his father by signs what he wanted him to be called.
63 So he asked for a tablet and wrote: “John is his name.” At this they were all amazed.
64 Instantly his mouth was opened and his tongue was set free and he began to speak, praising God.
65 And fear fell upon all those living in their neighborhood, and all these things began to be talked about in the whole mountainous country of Ju·deʹa.
66 And all who heard noted it in their hearts, saying: “What will this young child turn out to be?” For the hand of Jehovah was indeed with him.
67 Then Zech·a·riʹah his father was filled with holy spirit, and he prophesied, saying:
68 “Let Jehovah be praised, the God of Israel, because he has turned his attention to his people and has brought them deliverance.
69 And he has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of David his servant,
70 just as he has spoken through the mouth of his holy prophets from of old,
71 of a salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all those hating us;
72 to show mercy in connection with our forefathers and to call to mind his holy covenant,
73 the oath that he swore to Abraham our forefather,
74 to grant us, after we have been rescued from the hands of enemies, the privilege of fearlessly rendering sacred service to him
75 with loyalty and righteousness before him all our days.
76 But as for you, young child, you will be called a prophet of the Most High, for you will go ahead of Jehovah to prepare his ways,
77 to give knowledge of salvation to his people by forgiveness of their sins,
78 because of the tender compassion of our God. With this compassion a daybreak will visit us from on high,
79 to give light to those sitting in darkness and death’s shadow and to guide our feet in the way of peace.”
80 And the young child grew up and became strong in spirit, and he continued in the desert until the day he showed himself openly to Israel.
5 On one occasion when the crowd was pressing in on him and listening to the word of God, he was standing by the lake of Gen·nesʹa·ret.
2 And he saw two boats docked at the lakeside, but the fishermen had got out of them and were washing off their nets.
3 Going aboard one of the boats, which was Simon’s, he asked him to pull away a bit from land. Then he sat down, and he began teaching the crowds from the boat.
4 When he stopped speaking, he said to Simon: “Pull out to where it is deep, and let down your nets for a catch.”
5 But in reply Simon said: “Instructor, we toiled all night and caught nothing, but at your word I will lower the nets.”
6 Well, when they did this, they caught a great number of fish. In fact, their nets began ripping apart.
7 So they motioned to their partners in the other boat to come and assist them, and they came and filled both boats, so that these began to sink.
8 Seeing this, Simon Peter fell down at the knees of Jesus, saying: “Depart from me, Lord, because I am a sinful man.”
9 For both he and those with him were overwhelmed with astonishment at the catch of fish they had taken,
10 and the same was true of both James and John, Zebʹe·dee’s sons, who were partners with Simon. But Jesus said to Simon: “Stop being afraid. From now on you will be catching men alive.”
11 So they brought the boats back to land and abandoned everything and followed him.
12 On another occasion while he was in one of the cities, look! there was a man full of leprosy! When he caught sight of Jesus, he fell facedown and begged him: “Lord, if you just want to, you can make me clean.”
13 So stretching out his hand, he touched him, saying: “I want to! Be made clean.” Immediately the leprosy vanished from him.
14 Then he gave the man orders to tell no one: “But go and show yourself to the priest, and make an offering for your cleansing, just as Moses directed, for a witness to them.”
15 But the news about him just kept spreading, and large crowds would gather together to listen and to be cured of their sicknesses.
16 However, he often went into the desolate areas to pray.
17 On one of those days while he was teaching, Pharisees and teachers of the Law who had come out of every village of Galʹi·lee and Ju·deʹa and from Jerusalem were sitting there; and Jehovah’s power was with him to do healing.
18 And look! men were carrying a paralyzed man on a stretcher, and they were trying to bring him in and place him before Jesus.
19 So not finding a way to bring him in because of the crowd, they climbed up to the roof, and they lowered him on the stretcher through the tiling, right among those in front of Jesus.
20 When he saw their faith, he said: “Man, your sins are forgiven.”
21 Then the scribes and the Pharisees started to reason, saying: “Who is this who speaks blasphemies? Who can forgive sins except God alone?”
22 But Jesus, discerning their reasoning, said in answer to them: “What are you reasoning in your hearts?
23 Which is easier, to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Get up and walk’?
24 But in order for you to know that the Son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins—” he said to the paralyzed man: “I say to you, Get up, pick up your stretcher, and go to your home.”
25 At that he stood up before them, picked up what he had been lying on, and went to his home, glorifying God.
26 Then one and all were seized with amazement, and they began to glorify God, and they became filled with awe, saying: “We have seen wonderful things today!”
27 Now after this, he went out and saw a tax collector named Leʹvi sitting at the tax office, and he said to him: “Be my follower.”
28 And leaving everything behind, he rose up and began to follow him.
29 Then Leʹvi spread a big reception feast for him in his house, and there was a large crowd of tax collectors and others who were dining with them.
30 At this the Pharisees and their scribes began murmuring to his disciples, saying: “Why do you eat and drink with tax collectors and sinners?”
31 In reply Jesus said to them: “Those who are healthy do not need a physician, but those who are ill do.
32 I have come to call, not righteous people, but sinners to repentance.”
33 They said to him: “John’s disciples fast frequently and offer supplications, and so do those of the Pharisees, but yours eat and drink.”
34 Jesus said to them: “You cannot make the friends of the bridegroom fast while the bridegroom is with them, can you?
35 But days will come when the bridegroom will indeed be taken away from them; then they will fast in those days.”
36 He also gave an illustration to them: “Nobody cuts a patch from a new outer garment and sews it on an old garment. If he does, then the new patch tears away and the patch from the new garment does not match the old.
37 Also, no one puts new wine into old wineskins. If he does, the new wine will burst the wineskins and it will be spilled out and the wineskins will be ruined.
38 But new wine must be put into new wineskins.
39 No one after drinking old wine wants new, for he says, ‘The old is nice.’”
11 Now he was in a certain place praying, and when he stopped, one of his disciples said to him: “Lord, teach us how to pray, just as John also taught his disciples.”
2 So he said to them: “Whenever you pray, say: ‘Father, let your name be sanctified. Let your Kingdom come.
3 Give us each day our bread according to our daily needs.
4 And forgive us our sins, for we ourselves also forgive everyone who is in debt to us; and do not bring us into temptation.’”
5 Then he said to them: “Suppose one of you has a friend and you go to him at midnight and say to him, ‘Friend, lend me three loaves,
6 because one of my friends has just come to me on a journey and I have nothing to offer him.’
7 But that one replies from inside: ‘Stop bothering me. The door is already locked, and my young children are with me in bed. I cannot get up and give you anything.’
8 I tell you, even if he will not get up and give him anything because of being his friend, certainly because of his bold persistence he will get up and give him whatever he needs.
9 So I say to you, keep on asking, and it will be given you; keep on seeking, and you will find; keep on knocking, and it will be opened to you.
10 For everyone asking receives, and everyone seeking finds, and to everyone knocking, it will be opened.
11 Indeed, which father among you, if his son asks for a fish, will hand him a serpent instead of a fish?
12 Or if he also asks for an egg, will hand him a scorpion?
13 Therefore, if you, although being wicked, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more so will the Father in heaven give holy spirit to those asking him!”
14 Later he expelled a speechless demon. After the demon came out, the speechless man spoke, and the crowds were amazed.
15 But some of them said: “He expels the demons by means of Be·elʹze·bub, the ruler of the demons.”
16 And others, to test him, began demanding a sign out of heaven from him.
17 Knowing their thinking, he said to them: “Every kingdom divided against itself comes to ruin, and a house divided against itself falls.
18 In the same way, if Satan is also divided against himself, how will his kingdom stand? For you say I expel the demons by means of Be·elʹze·bub.
19 If I expel the demons by means of Be·elʹze·bub, by whom do your sons expel them? This is why they will be your judges.
20 But if it is by means of God’s finger that I expel the demons, the Kingdom of God has really overtaken you.
21 When a strong, well-armed man guards his palace, his belongings remain secure.
22 But when someone stronger than he is comes against him and conquers him, that man takes away all his weapons in which he was trusting, and he divides up the things he took from him.
23 Whoever is not on my side is against me, and whoever does not gather with me scatters.
24 “When an unclean spirit comes out of a man, it passes through waterless places in search of a resting-place, and after finding none, it says, ‘I will return to my house from which I moved.’
25 And on arriving, it finds the house swept clean and adorned.
26 Then it goes and takes along seven other spirits more wicked than itself, and after getting inside, they dwell there. So the final circumstances of that man become worse than the first.”
27 Now as he was saying these things, a woman from the crowd called out to him: “Happy is the womb that carried you and the breasts that nursed you!”
28 But he said: “No, rather, happy are those hearing the word of God and keeping it!”
29 When the crowds were massing together, he began to say: “This generation is a wicked generation; it looks for a sign, but no sign will be given to it except the sign of Joʹnah.
30 For just as Joʹnah became a sign to the Ninʹe·vites, so will the Son of man be to this generation.
31 The queen of the south will be raised up in the judgment with the men of this generation and will condemn them, for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solʹo·mon. But look! something more than Solʹo·mon is here.
32 The men of Ninʹe·veh will rise in the judgment with this generation and will condemn it, because they repented at what Joʹnah preached. But look! something more than Joʹnah is here.
33 After lighting a lamp, a person puts it, not in a hidden place nor under a basket, but on the lampstand, so that those who come in may see the light.
34 The lamp of the body is your eye. When your eye is focused, your whole body is also bright; but when it is envious, your body is also dark.
35 Be alert, therefore, that the light that is in you is not darkness.
36 Therefore, if your whole body is bright with no part of it dark, it will all be as bright as when a lamp gives you light by its rays.”
37 When he had said this, a Pharisee asked him to dine with him. So he went in and reclined at the table.
38 However, the Pharisee was surprised at seeing that he did not first wash before the dinner.
39 But the Lord said to him: “Now you Pharisees, you cleanse the outside of the cup and dish, but inside you are full of greediness and wickedness.
40 Unreasonable ones! The one who made the outside made also the inside, did he not?
41 But give as gifts of mercy the things that are from within, and look! everything about you will be clean.
42 But woe to you Pharisees, because you give the tenth of the mint and of the rue and of every other garden herb, but you disregard the justice and the love of God! These things you were under obligation to do, but not to disregard those other things.
43 Woe to you Pharisees, because you love the front seats in the synagogues and the greetings in the marketplaces!
44 Woe to you, because you are as those graves that are not clearly visible, that men walk on and do not know it!”
45 In reply one of those versed in the Law said to him: “Teacher, in saying these things, you insult us also.”
46 Then he said: “Woe also to you who are versed in the Law, because you load men down with loads hard to carry, but you yourselves do not touch the loads with one of your fingers!
47 “Woe to you, because you build the tombs of the prophets, but your forefathers killed them!
48 Certainly you are witnesses of the deeds of your forefathers, and yet you approve of them, for they killed the prophets but you are building their tombs.
49 That is why the wisdom of God also said: ‘I will send prophets and apostles to them, and they will kill and persecute some of them,
50 so that the blood of all the prophets spilled from the founding of the world may be charged against this generation,
51 from the blood of Abel down to the blood of Zech·a·riʹah, who was killed between the altar and the house.’ Yes, I tell you, it will be charged against this generation.
52 “Woe to you who are versed in the Law, because you took away the key of knowledge. You yourselves did not go in, and you hinder those going in!”
53 So when he went out from there, the scribes and the Pharisees began to put extreme pressure on him and to ply him with many more questions,
54 lying in wait for him to catch him in something he might say.
12 In the meantime, when a crowd of so many thousands had gathered together that they were stepping on one another, he started by saying first to his disciples: “Watch out for the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.
2 But there is nothing carefully concealed that will not be revealed, and nothing secret that will not become known.
3 Therefore, whatever you say in the darkness will be heard in the light, and what you whisper in private rooms will be preached from the housetops.
4 Moreover, I say to you, my friends, do not fear those who kill the body and after this are not able to do anything more.
5 But I will show you whom to fear: Fear the One who after killing has authority to throw into Ge·henʹna. Yes, I tell you, fear this One.
6 Five sparrows sell for two coins of small value, do they not? Yet not one of them is forgotten by God.
7 But even the hairs of your head are all numbered. Have no fear; you are worth more than many sparrows.
8 “I say to you, everyone who acknowledges me before men, the Son of man will also acknowledge him before the angels of God.
9 But whoever disowns me before men will be disowned before the angels of God.
10 And everyone who says a word against the Son of man, it will be forgiven him, but whoever blasphemes against the holy spirit will not be forgiven.
11 When they bring you in before public assemblies, government officials, and authorities, do not become anxious about how or what you will speak in defense or what you will say,
12 for the holy spirit will teach you in that very hour the things you should say.”
13 Then someone in the crowd said to him: “Teacher, tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me.”
14 He said to him: “Man, who appointed me judge or arbitrator between you two?”
15 Then he said to them: “Keep your eyes open and guard against every sort of greed, because even when a person has an abundance, his life does not result from the things he possesses.”
16 With that he told them an illustration, saying: “The land of a rich man produced well.
17 So he began reasoning within himself, ‘What should I do now that I have nowhere to gather my crops?’
18 Then he said, ‘I will do this: I will tear down my storehouses and build bigger ones, and there I will gather all my grain and all my goods,
19 and I will say to myself: “You have many good things stored up for many years; take it easy, eat, drink, enjoy yourself.”’
20 But God said to him, ‘Unreasonable one, this night they are demanding your life from you. Who, then, is to have the things you stored up?’
21 So it goes with the man who stores up treasure for himself but is not rich toward God.”
22 Then he said to his disciples: “That is why I say to you, stop being anxious about your lives as to what you will eat or about your bodies as to what you will wear.
23 For the life is worth more than food and the body more than clothing.
24 Consider the ravens: They neither sow seed nor reap; they have neither barn nor storehouse; yet God feeds them. Are you not worth much more than birds?
25 Who of you by being anxious can add a cubit to his life span?
26 If, therefore, you cannot do such a small thing, why be anxious about the remaining things?
27 Consider how the lilies grow: They neither toil nor spin; but I tell you that not even Solʹo·mon in all his glory was arrayed as one of these.
28 Now if this is how God clothes the vegetation in the field that today exists and tomorrow is cast into an oven, how much more will he clothe you, you with little faith!
29 So stop seeking what you will eat and what you will drink, and stop being in anxious suspense;
30 for all these are the things the nations of the world are eagerly pursuing, but your Father knows you need these things.
31 Instead, keep seeking his Kingdom, and these things will be added to you.
32 “Have no fear, little flock, for your Father has approved of giving you the Kingdom.
33 Sell your belongings and give gifts of mercy. Make money pouches that do not wear out, a never-failing treasure in the heavens, where no thief gets near and no moth consumes.
34 For where your treasure is, there your hearts will be also.
35 “Be dressed and ready and have your lamps burning,
36 and you should be like men waiting for their master to return from the marriage, so when he comes and knocks, they may at once open to him.
37 Happy are those slaves whom the master on coming finds watching! Truly I say to you, he will dress himself for service and have them recline at the table and will come alongside and minister to them.
38 And if he comes in the second watch, even if in the third, and finds them ready, happy are they!
39 But know this, if the householder had known at what hour the thief would come, he would not have let his house be broken into.
40 You also, keep ready, because at an hour that you do not think likely, the Son of man is coming.”
41 Then Peter said: “Lord, are you telling this illustration just to us or also to everyone?”
42 And the Lord said: “Who really is the faithful steward, the discreet one, whom his master will appoint over his body of attendants to keep giving them their measure of food supplies at the proper time?
43 Happy is that slave if his master on coming finds him doing so!
44 I tell you truthfully, he will appoint him over all his belongings.
45 But if ever that slave should say in his heart, ‘My master delays coming,’ and starts to beat the male and female servants and to eat and drink and get drunk,
46 the master of that slave will come on a day that he is not expecting him and at an hour that he does not know, and he will punish him with the greatest severity and assign him a part with the unfaithful ones.
47 Then that slave who understood the will of his master but did not get ready or do what he asked will be beaten with many strokes.
48 But the one who did not understand and yet did things deserving of strokes will be beaten with few. Indeed, everyone to whom much was given, much will be demanded of him, and the one who was put in charge of much will have more than usual demanded of him.
49 “I came to start a fire on the earth, and what more is there for me to wish if it has already been lit?
50 Indeed, I have a baptism with which to be baptized, and how I am distressed until it is finished!
51 Do you think I came to give peace on the earth? No, I tell you, but rather division.
52 For from now on there will be five in one house divided, three against two and two against three.
53 They will be divided, father against son and son against father, mother against daughter and daughter against mother, mother-in-law against daughter-in-law and daughter-in-law against mother-in-law.”
54 Then he also said to the crowds: “When you see a cloud rising in the west, at once you say, ‘A storm is coming,’ and it happens.
55 And when you see that a south wind is blowing, you say, ‘There will be a heat wave,’ and it occurs.
56 Hypocrites, you know how to examine the appearance of earth and sky, but why do you not know how to examine this particular time?
57 Why do you not judge also for yourselves what is righteous?
58 For example, when you are going with your legal opponent to a ruler, while on the way, get to work to settle the dispute with him so that he may not summon you before the judge, and the judge deliver you to the court officer, and the court officer throw you into prison.
59 I tell you, you will certainly not get out of there until you pay over your last small coin.”
14 On another occasion he went to eat a meal in the house of one of the leaders of the Pharisees on the Sabbath, and they were closely watching him.
2 And look! a man who had dropsy was in front of him.
3 So in response Jesus asked those versed in the Law and the Pharisees: “Is it lawful to cure on the Sabbath or not?”
4 But they kept silent. With that he took hold of the man, healed him, and sent him away.
5 Then he said to them: “Who of you, if his son or bull falls into a well, will not immediately pull him out on the Sabbath day?”
6 And they were not able to reply to this.
7 He then told the invited men an illustration when he noticed how they were choosing the most prominent places for themselves. He said to them:
8 “When you are invited by someone to a marriage feast, do not recline in the most prominent place. Perhaps someone more distinguished than you may also have been invited.
9 Then the one who invited you both will come and say to you, ‘Let this man have your place.’ Then you will proceed with shame to take the lowest place.
10 But when you are invited, go and recline in the lowest place, so that when the man who invited you comes, he will say to you, ‘Friend, go on up higher.’ Then you will have honor in front of all your fellow guests.
11 For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.”
12 Next he said also to the man who had invited him: “When you spread a dinner or an evening meal, do not call your friends or your brothers or your relatives or your rich neighbors. Otherwise, they might also invite you in return, and it would become a repayment to you.
13 But when you spread a feast, invite the poor, the crippled, the lame, the blind;
14 and you will be happy, because they have nothing with which to repay you. For you will be repaid in the resurrection of the righteous ones.”
15 On hearing these things, one of the fellow guests said to him: “Happy is the one who dines in the Kingdom of God.”
16 Jesus said to him: “A man was spreading a grand evening meal, and he invited many.
17 He sent his slave out at the hour of the evening meal to say to the invited ones, ‘Come, because everything is now ready.’
18 But they all alike began to make excuses. The first said to him, ‘I bought a field and need to go out and see it; I ask you, have me excused.’
19 And another said, ‘I bought five yoke of cattle and am going to examine them; I ask you, have me excused.’
20 Still another said, ‘I just got married, and for this reason I cannot come.’
21 So the slave came and reported these things to his master. Then the master of the house became angry and said to his slave, ‘Go out quickly to the main streets and the alleys of the city, and bring in here the poor and crippled and blind and lame.’
22 In time the slave said, ‘Master, what you ordered has been done, and still there is room.’
23 So the master said to the slave, ‘Go out to the roads and the lanes and compel them to come in, so that my house may be filled.
24 For I say to you, none of those men who were invited will taste my evening meal.’”
25 Now large crowds were traveling with him, and he turned and said to them:
26 “If anyone comes to me and does not hate his father and mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters, yes, and even his own life, he cannot be my disciple.
27 Whoever does not carry his torture stake and come after me cannot be my disciple.
28 For example, who of you wanting to build a tower does not first sit down and calculate the expense to see if he has enough to complete it?
29 Otherwise, he might lay its foundation but not be able to finish it, and all the onlookers would start to ridicule him,
30 saying: ‘This man started to build but was not able to finish.’
31 Or what king marching out against another king in war does not first sit down and take counsel whether he is able with 10,000 troops to stand up to the one who comes against him with 20,000?
32 If, in fact, he cannot do so, then while that one is yet far away, he sends out a body of ambassadors and sues for peace.
33 In the same way, you may be sure that not one of you who does not say good-bye to all his belongings can be my disciple.
34 “Salt, to be sure, is fine. But if the salt loses its strength, with what will it be seasoned?
35 It is not suitable for soil or for manure. People throw it away. Let the one who has ears to listen, listen.”
17 Then he said to his disciples: “It is unavoidable that causes for stumbling should come. Nevertheless, woe to the one through whom they come!
2 It would be more advantageous for him if a millstone were hung from his neck and he were thrown into the sea than for him to stumble one of these little ones.
3 Pay attention to yourselves. If your brother commits a sin, rebuke him, and if he repents, forgive him.
4 Even if he sins seven times a day against you and he comes back to you seven times, saying, ‘I repent,’ you must forgive him.”
5 Now the apostles said to the Lord: “Give us more faith.”
6 Then the Lord said: “If you had faith the size of a mustard grain, you would say to this black mulberry tree, ‘Be uprooted and planted in the sea!’ and it would obey you.
7 “Which one of you who has a slave plowing or shepherding would say to him when he comes in from the field, ‘Come here at once and dine at the table’?
8 Rather, will he not say to him, ‘Get something ready for me to have my evening meal, and put on an apron and serve me until I finish eating and drinking, and afterward you can eat and drink’?
9 He will not feel gratitude to the slave because he did what was assigned, will he?
10 Likewise, when you have done all the things assigned to you, say: ‘We are good-for-nothing slaves. What we have done is what we ought to have done.’”
11 While he was going to Jerusalem, he was passing between Sa·marʹi·a and Galʹi·lee.
12 And as he was entering a village, ten men with leprosy met him, but they stood at a distance.
13 And they raised their voices and said: “Jesus, Instructor, have mercy on us!”
14 When he saw them, he said to them: “Go and show yourselves to the priests.” Then as they were going off, they were cleansed.
15 One of them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back, glorifying God with a loud voice.
16 And he fell facedown at Jesus’ feet, thanking him. Furthermore, he was a Sa·marʹi·tan.
17 In reply Jesus said: “All ten were cleansed, were they not? Where, then, are the other nine?
18 Did no one else turn back to give glory to God except this man of another nation?”
19 Then he said to him: “Get up and be on your way; your faith has made you well.”
20 On being asked by the Pharisees when the Kingdom of God was coming, he answered them: “The Kingdom of God is not coming with striking observableness;
21 nor will people say, ‘See here!’ or, ‘There!’ For look! the Kingdom of God is in your midst.”
22 Then he said to the disciples: “Days will come when you will desire to see one of the days of the Son of man, but you will not see it.
23 And people will say to you, ‘See there!’ or, ‘See here!’ Do not go out or chase after them.
24 For just as lightning flashes from one part of heaven to another part of heaven, so the Son of man will be in his day.
25 First, however, he must undergo many sufferings and be rejected by this generation.
26 Moreover, just as it occurred in the days of Noah, so it will be in the days of the Son of man:
27 they were eating, they were drinking, men were marrying, women were being given in marriage until that day when Noah entered into the ark, and the Flood came and destroyed them all.
28 Likewise, just as it occurred in the days of Lot: they were eating, they were drinking, they were buying, they were selling, they were planting, they were building.
29 But on the day that Lot went out of Sodʹom, it rained fire and sulfur from heaven and destroyed them all.
30 It will be the same on that day when the Son of man is revealed.
31 “On that day let the person who is on the housetop but whose belongings are in the house not come down to pick these up, and likewise, the person out in the field must not return to the things behind.
32 Remember the wife of Lot.
33 Whoever seeks to keep his life safe will lose it, but whoever loses it will preserve it alive.
34 I tell you, in that night two people will be in one bed; the one will be taken along, but the other will be abandoned.
35 There will be two women grinding at the same mill; the one will be taken along, but the other will be abandoned.”
37 So in response they said to him: “Where, Lord?” He said to them: “Where the body is, there also the eagles will be gathered together.”
18 Then he went on to tell them an illustration about the need for them always to pray and not to give up,
2 saying: “In a certain city there was a judge who had no fear of God and no respect for man.
3 There was also a widow in that city who kept going to him and saying, ‘See that I get justice from my legal opponent.’
4 Well, for a while he was unwilling, but afterward he said to himself, ‘Although I do not fear God or respect any man,
5 because this widow keeps making me trouble, I will see that she gets justice so that she will not keep coming and wearing me out with her demand.’”
6 Then the Lord said: “Hear what the judge, although unrighteous, said!
7 Certainly, then, will not God cause justice to be done for his chosen ones who cry out to him day and night, while he is patient toward them?
8 I tell you, he will cause justice to be done to them speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of man arrives, will he really find this faith on the earth?”
9 He also told this illustration to some who trusted in their own righteousness and who considered others as nothing:
10 “Two men went up into the temple to pray, the one a Pharisee and the other a tax collector.
11 The Pharisee stood and began to pray these things to himself, ‘O God, I thank you that I am not like everyone else—extortioners, unrighteous, adulterers—or even like this tax collector.
12 I fast twice a week; I give the tenth of all things I acquire.’
13 But the tax collector, standing at a distance, was not willing even to raise his eyes heavenward but kept beating his chest, saying, ‘O God, be gracious to me, a sinner.’
14 I tell you, this man went down to his home and was proved more righteous than that Pharisee. Because everyone who exalts himself will be humiliated, but whoever humbles himself will be exalted.”
15 Now people were also bringing him their infants for him to touch them, but on seeing this, the disciples began to reprimand them.
16 However, Jesus called the infants to him, saying: “Let the young children come to me, and do not try to stop them, for the Kingdom of God belongs to such ones.
17 Truly I say to you, whoever does not receive the Kingdom of God like a young child will by no means enter into it.”
18 And one of the rulers questioned him, saying: “Good Teacher, what must I do to inherit everlasting life?”
19 Jesus said to him: “Why do you call me good? Nobody is good except one, God.
20 You know the commandments: ‘Do not commit adultery, do not murder, do not steal, do not bear false witness, honor your father and your mother.’”
21 Then he said: “All of these I have kept from youth on.”
22 After hearing that, Jesus said to him, “There is still one thing lacking about you: Sell all the things you have and distribute the proceeds to the poor, and you will have treasure in the heavens; and come be my follower.”
23 When he heard this, he became deeply grieved, for he was very rich.
24 Jesus looked at him and said: “How difficult it will be for those having money to make their way into the Kingdom of God!
25 It is easier, in fact, for a camel to get through the eye of a sewing needle than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of God.”
26 Those who heard this said: “Who possibly can be saved?”
27 He said: “The things impossible with men are possible with God.”
28 But Peter said: “Look! We have left what was ours and followed you.”
29 He said to them: “Truly I say to you, there is no one who has left house or wife or brothers or parents or children for the sake of the Kingdom of God
30 who will not get many times more in this period of time, and in the coming system of things, everlasting life.”
31 Then he took the Twelve aside and said to them: “Look! We are going up to Jerusalem, and all the things written by means of the prophets about the Son of man will be accomplished.
32 For instance, he will be handed over to men of the nations and will be mocked and treated insolently and spat on.
33 And after scourging him, they will kill him, but on the third day he will rise.”
34 However, they did not get the meaning of any of these things, for these words were hidden from them, and they did not understand the things said.
35 Now as Jesus was getting near to Jerʹi·cho, a blind man was sitting beside the road begging.
36 Because he heard a crowd passing by, he began to inquire what was going on.
37 They reported to him: “Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ is passing by!”
38 At that he cried out: “Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me!”
39 And those who were in front began rebuking him, telling him to keep quiet, but all the more he kept shouting: “Son of David, have mercy on me!”
40 Then Jesus stopped and commanded that the man be brought to him. After he came near, Jesus asked him:
41 “What do you want me to do for you?” He said: “Lord, let me recover my sight.”
42 So Jesus said to him: “Recover your sight; your faith has made you well.”
43 And instantly he recovered his sight, and he began to follow him, glorifying God. Also, at seeing it, all the people gave praise to God.
19 He then entered Jerʹi·cho and was passing through.
2 Now a man named Zac·chaeʹus was there; he was a chief tax collector, and he was rich.
3 Well, he was trying to see who this Jesus was, but he could not see because of the crowd, since he was short.
4 So he ran ahead and climbed a sycamore tree in order to see him, for he was about to pass that way.
5 Now when Jesus got to the place, he looked up and said to him: “Zac·chaeʹus, hurry and get down, for today I must stay in your house.”
6 With that he hurried down and joyfully welcomed him as a guest.
7 When they saw this, they were all muttering: “He went as a guest to the house of a man who is a sinner.”
8 But Zac·chaeʹus stood up and said to the Lord: “Look! The half of my belongings, Lord, I am giving to the poor, and whatever I extorted from anyone, I am restoring four times over.”
9 At this Jesus said to him: “Today salvation has come to this house, because he too is a son of Abraham.
10 For the Son of man came to seek and to save what was lost.”
11 While they were listening to these things, he told another illustration, because he was near Jerusalem and they thought that the Kingdom of God was going to appear instantly.
12 So he said: “A man of noble birth traveled to a distant land to secure kingly power for himself and to return.
13 Calling ten of his slaves, he gave them ten miʹnas and told them, ‘Do business with these until I come.’
14 But his citizens hated him and sent out a body of ambassadors after him to say, ‘We do not want this man to become king over us.’
15 “When he eventually got back after having secured the kingly power, he summoned the slaves to whom he had given the money, in order to ascertain what they had gained by their business activity.
16 So the first one came forward and said, ‘Lord, your miʹna gained ten miʹnas.’
17 He said to him, ‘Well done, good slave! Because in a very small matter you have proved yourself faithful, hold authority over ten cities.’
18 Now the second came, saying, ‘Your miʹna, Lord, made five miʹnas.’
19 He said to this one as well, ‘You too be in charge of five cities.’
20 But another one came, saying, ‘Lord, here is your miʹna that I kept hidden away in a cloth.
21 You see, I was in fear of you, because you are a harsh man; you take what you did not deposit, and you reap what you did not sow.’
22 He said to him, ‘By your own words I judge you, wicked slave. You knew, did you, that I am a harsh man, taking what I did not deposit and reaping what I did not sow?
23 So why did you not put my money in a bank? Then on my coming, I would have collected it with interest.’
24 “With that he said to those standing by, ‘Take the miʹna from him and give it to the one who has the ten miʹnas.’
25 But they said to him, ‘Lord, he has ten miʹnas!’—
26 ‘I say to you, to everyone who has, more will be given, but from the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken away.
27 Moreover, bring these enemies of mine here who did not want me to become king over them and execute them in front of me.’”
28 After he had said these things, he went on ahead, going up to Jerusalem.
29 And when he got near to Bethʹpha·ge and Bethʹa·ny at the mountain called Mount of Olives, he sent two of the disciples,
30 saying: “Go into the village that is within sight, and after you enter it, you will find a colt tied, on which no man has ever sat. Untie it and bring it here.
31 But if anyone asks you, ‘Why are you untying it?’ you must say, ‘The Lord needs it.’”
32 So those who were sent went away and found it just as he had said to them.
33 But as they were untying the colt, its owners said to them: “Why are you untying the colt?”
34 They said: “The Lord needs it.”
35 And they led it to Jesus, and they threw their outer garments on the colt and seated Jesus on it.
36 As he moved along, they were spreading their outer garments on the road.
37 As soon as he got near the road down the Mount of Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and to praise God with a loud voice because of all the powerful works they had seen,
38 saying: “Blessed is the one coming as the King in Jehovah’s name! Peace in heaven, and glory in the heights above!”
39 However, some of the Pharisees from the crowd said to him: “Teacher, rebuke your disciples.”
40 But in reply he said: “I tell you, if these remained silent, the stones would cry out.”
41 And when he got nearby, he viewed the city and wept over it,
42 saying: “If you, even you, had discerned on this day the things having to do with peace—but now they have been hidden from your eyes.
43 Because the days will come upon you when your enemies will build around you a fortification of pointed stakes and will encircle you and besiege you from every side.
44 They will dash you and your children within you to the ground, and they will not leave a stone upon a stone in you, because you did not discern the time of your being inspected.”
45 Then he entered the temple and started to throw out those who were selling,
46 saying to them: “It is written, ‘My house will be a house of prayer,’ but you have made it a cave of robbers.”
47 He continued teaching daily in the temple. But the chief priests and the scribes and the principal ones of the people were seeking to kill him;
48 but they did not find any way to do this, for the people one and all kept hanging on to him to hear him.
20 On one of the days while he was teaching the people in the temple and declaring the good news, the chief priests and the scribes with the elders came
2 and said to him: “Tell us, by what authority do you do these things? Or who gave you this authority?”
3 He replied to them: “I will also ask you a question, and you tell me:
4 Was the baptism of John from heaven or from men?”
5 Then they drew conclusions among themselves, saying: “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say, ‘Why did you not believe him?’
6 But if we say, ‘From men,’ the people one and all will stone us, for they are convinced that John was a prophet.”
7 So they replied that they did not know its source.
8 Jesus said to them: “Neither am I telling you by what authority I do these things.”
9 Then he began to tell the people this illustration: “A man planted a vineyard and leased it to cultivators, and he traveled abroad for a considerable time.
10 In due season he sent a slave to the cultivators so that they would give him some of the fruit of the vineyard. The cultivators, however, sent him away empty-handed, after beating him.
11 But again he sent another slave. That one also they beat and humiliated and sent away empty-handed.
12 Yet again he sent a third; this one also they wounded and threw out.
13 At this the owner of the vineyard said, ‘What should I do? I will send my son, the beloved. They will likely respect this one.’
14 When the cultivators caught sight of him, they reasoned with one another, saying, ‘This is the heir. Let us kill him so that the inheritance may become ours.’
15 So they threw him out of the vineyard and killed him. What, then, will the owner of the vineyard do to them?
16 He will come and kill these cultivators and will give the vineyard to others.” On hearing this, they said: “Never may that happen!”
17 But he looked straight at them and said: “What, then, does this mean where it is written: ‘The stone that the builders rejected, this has become the chief cornerstone’?
18 Everyone falling on that stone will be shattered. As for anyone on whom it falls, it will crush him.”
19 The scribes and the chief priests then sought to get their hands on him in that very hour, but they feared the people, for they realized that he told this illustration with them in mind.
20 And after observing him closely, they sent men whom they had secretly hired to pretend that they were righteous in order to catch him in his speech, so as to turn him over to the government and to the authority of the governor.
21 And they questioned him, saying: “Teacher, we know you speak and teach correctly and show no partiality, but you teach the way of God in line with truth:
22 Is it lawful for us to pay head tax to Caesar or not?”
23 But he detected their cunning and said to them:
24 “Show me a de·narʹi·us. Whose image and inscription does it have?” They said: “Caesar’s.”
25 He said to them: “By all means, then, pay back Caesar’s things to Caesar but God’s things to God.”
26 Well, they were not able to trap him in his speech before the people, but amazed at his answer, they became silent.
27 However, some of the Sadducees, those who say there is no resurrection, came and asked him:
28 “Teacher, Moses wrote us, ‘If a man’s brother dies, leaving a wife, but he was childless, his brother should take the wife and raise up offspring for his brother.’
29 Now there were seven brothers. The first took a wife but died childless.
30 So the second
31 and the third married her. Likewise even all seven; they died and left no children.
32 Finally the woman also died.
33 Consequently, in the resurrection, whose wife will she become? For the seven had her as a wife.”
34 Jesus said to them: “The children of this system of things marry and are given in marriage,
35 but those who have been counted worthy of gaining that system of things and the resurrection from the dead neither marry nor are given in marriage.
36 In fact, neither can they die anymore, for they are like the angels, and they are God’s children by being children of the resurrection.
37 But that the dead are raised up, even Moses made known in the account about the thornbush, when he calls Jehovah ‘the God of Abraham and God of Isaac and God of Jacob.’
38 He is a God, not of the dead, but of the living, for they are all living to him.”
39 In response some of the scribes said: “Teacher, you spoke well.”
40 For they no longer had the courage to ask him a single question.
41 In turn he asked them: “How is it they say that the Christ is David’s son?
42 For David himself says in the book of Psalms, ‘Jehovah said to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand
43 until I place your enemies as a stool for your feet.”’
44 David, therefore, calls him Lord; so how is he his son?”
45 Then, while all the people were listening, he said to his disciples:
46 “Beware of the scribes who like to walk around in robes and who love greetings in the marketplaces and front seats in the synagogues and the most prominent places at evening meals,
47 and who devour the houses of the widows and for show make long prayers. These will receive a more severe judgment.”
21 Now as he looked up, he saw the rich dropping their gifts into the treasury chests.
2 Then he saw a needy widow drop in two small coins of very little value,
3 and he said: “Truly I say to you that this poor widow put in more than they all did.
4 For all of these put in gifts out of their surplus, but she, out of her want, put in all the means of living she had.”
5 Later, when some were speaking about the temple, how it was adorned with fine stones and dedicated things,
6 he said: “As for these things that you now see, the days will come when not a stone will be left upon a stone and not be thrown down.”
7 Then they questioned him, saying: “Teacher, when will these things actually be, and what will be the sign when these things are to occur?”
8 He said: “Look out that you are not misled, for many will come on the basis of my name, saying, ‘I am he,’ and, ‘The due time is near.’ Do not go after them.
9 Furthermore, when you hear of wars and disturbances, do not be terrified. For these things must take place first, but the end will not occur immediately.”
10 Then he said to them: “Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.
11 There will be great earthquakes, and in one place after another food shortages and pestilences; and there will be fearful sights and from heaven great signs.
12 “But before all these things happen, people will lay their hands on you and persecute you, handing you over to the synagogues and prisons. You will be brought before kings and governors for the sake of my name.
13 It will result in your giving a witness.
14 Therefore, resolve in your hearts not to rehearse beforehand how to make your defense,
15 for I will give you words and wisdom that all your opposers together will not be able to resist or dispute.
16 Moreover, you will be handed over even by parents and brothers and relatives and friends, and they will put some of you to death,
17 and you will be hated by all people because of my name.
18 But not even a hair of your heads will perish.
19 By your endurance you will preserve your lives.
20 “However, when you see Jerusalem surrounded by encamped armies, then know that the desolating of her has drawn near.
21 Then let those in Ju·deʹa begin fleeing to the mountains, let those in the midst of her leave, and let those in the countryside not enter into her,
22 because these are days for meting out justice in order that all the things written may be fulfilled.
23 Woe to the pregnant women and those nursing a baby in those days! For there will be great distress on the land and wrath against this people.
24 And they will fall by the edge of the sword and be led captive into all the nations; and Jerusalem will be trampled on by the nations until the appointed times of the nations are fulfilled.
25 “Also, there will be signs in the sun and moon and stars, and on the earth anguish of nations not knowing the way out because of the roaring of the sea and its agitation.
26 People will become faint out of fear and expectation of the things coming upon the inhabited earth, for the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
27 And then they will see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.
28 But as these things start to occur, stand up straight and lift up your heads, because your deliverance is getting near.”
29 With that he told them an illustration: “Notice the fig tree and all the other trees.
30 When they are budding, you see it for yourselves and know that now the summer is near.
31 Likewise also you, when you see these things happening, know that the Kingdom of God is near.
32 Truly I say to you that this generation will by no means pass away until all things happen.
33 Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will by no means pass away.
34 “But pay attention to yourselves that your hearts never become weighed down with overeating and heavy drinking and anxieties of life, and suddenly that day be instantly upon you
35 as a snare. For it will come upon all those dwelling on the face of the whole earth.
36 Keep awake, then, all the time making supplication that you may succeed in escaping all these things that must occur and in standing before the Son of man.”
37 So by day he would be teaching in the temple, but by night he would go out and lodge on the mountain called the Mount of Olives.
38 And all the people would come to him early in the morning to hear him in the temple.
23 So the multitude got up, one and all, and led him to Pilate.
2 Then they began to accuse him, saying: “We found this man subverting our nation, forbidding the paying of taxes to Caesar, and saying he himself is Christ a king.”
3 Now Pilate asked him the question: “Are you the King of the Jews?” In answer he said: “You yourself are saying it.”
4 Then Pilate said to the chief priests and the crowds: “I find no crime in this man.”
5 But they insisted, saying: “He stirs up the people by teaching throughout all Ju·deʹa, starting from Galʹi·lee even to here.”
6 On hearing that, Pilate asked whether the man was a Gal·i·leʹan.
7 After ascertaining that he was under the jurisdiction of Herod, he sent him on to Herod, who was also in Jerusalem in those days.
8 When Herod saw Jesus, he rejoiced greatly. For a considerable time he had been wanting to see Jesus because he had heard much about him, and he was hoping to see some sign performed by him.
9 So he began to question him at length, but he gave him no answer.
10 However, the chief priests and the scribes kept standing up and vehemently accusing him.
11 Then Herod together with his soldiers treated him with contempt, and he mocked him by clothing him with a splendid garment and then sent him back to Pilate.
12 Herod and Pilate became friends with each other on that very day, for before that they had been at enmity with each other.
13 Pilate then called together the chief priests, the rulers, and the people
14 and said to them: “You brought this man to me as one inciting the people to revolt. Now look! I examined him in front of you but found in this man no grounds for the charges you are bringing against him.
15 In fact, neither did Herod, for he sent him back to us, and look! he has done nothing deserving of death.
16 I will therefore punish him and release him.”
18 But the whole crowd shouted out: “Do away with this man, and release Bar·abʹbas to us!”
19 (This man had been thrown into prison for sedition that had occurred in the city and for murder.)
20 Again Pilate called out to them, because he wanted to release Jesus.
21 Then they began to yell, saying: “To the stake with him! To the stake with him!”
22 The third time he said to them: “Why? What bad thing did this man do? I found in him nothing deserving of death; I will therefore punish him and release him.”
23 At this they became insistent, demanding with loud voices that he be executed, and their voices prevailed.
24 So Pilate made the decision that their demand be met.
25 He released the man whom they were demanding, who had been thrown into prison for sedition and murder, but he surrendered Jesus to their will.
26 Now as they led him away, they seized a certain Simon of Cy·reʹne, who was coming from the countryside, and they placed the torture stake on him to carry it behind Jesus.
27 A large number of people were following him, including women who kept beating themselves in grief and wailing for him.
28 Jesus turned to the women and said: “Daughters of Jerusalem, stop weeping for me. Weep instead for yourselves and for your children;
29 for look! days are coming when people will say, ‘Happy are the barren women, the wombs that did not give birth and the breasts that did not nurse!’
30 Then they will start saying to the mountains, ‘Fall over us!’ and to the hills, ‘Cover us over!’
31 If they do these things when the tree is moist, what will occur when it is withered?”
32 Two other men, criminals, were also being led off to be executed with him.
33 And when they got to the place called Skull, they nailed him to the stake there alongside the criminals, one on his right and one on his left.
34 But Jesus was saying: “Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they are doing.” Furthermore, they cast lots to distribute his garments.
35 And the people stood looking on. But the rulers were sneering and saying: “Others he saved; let him save himself if he is the Christ of God, the Chosen One.”
36 Even the soldiers mocked him, coming up and offering him sour wine
37 and saying: “If you are the King of the Jews, save yourself.”
38 There was also an inscription over him: “This is the King of the Jews.”
39 Then one of the criminals hanging there began to speak abusively to him, saying: “You are the Christ, are you not? Save yourself and us too!”
40 In response the other rebuked him, saying: “Do you not fear God at all, now that you have received the same judgment?
41 And we rightly so, for we are getting back what we deserve for the things we did; but this man did nothing wrong.”
42 Then he said: “Jesus, remember me when you get into your Kingdom.”
43 And he said to him: “Truly I tell you today, you will be with me in Paradise.”
44 Well, by now it was about the sixth hour, and yet a darkness fell over all the land until the ninth hour,
45 because the sunlight failed; then the curtain of the sanctuary was torn down the middle.
46 And Jesus called out with a loud voice and said: “Father, into your hands I entrust my spirit.” After he said this, he expired.
47 Because of seeing what occurred, the army officer began to glorify God, saying: “Truly, this man was righteous.”
48 And when all the crowds that were gathered together there for this spectacle saw the things that occurred, they returned home, beating their chests.
49 And all those acquainted with him were standing at a distance. Also, women who had accompanied him from Galʹi·lee were there and saw these things.
50 And look! there was a man named Joseph, a member of the Council, who was a good and righteous man.
51 (This man had not voted in support of their scheme and action.) He was from Ar·i·ma·theʹa, a city of the Ju·deʹans, and was waiting for the Kingdom of God.
52 This man went in before Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus.
53 And he took it down and wrapped it up in fine linen, and he laid it in a tomb carved in the rock, where no man had yet lain.
54 Now it was the day of Preparation, and the Sabbath was about to begin.
55 But the women who had come with him from Galʹi·lee followed along and took a look at the tomb and saw how his body was laid,
56 and they went back to prepare spices and perfumed oils. But, of course, they rested on the Sabbath according to the commandment.
24 But on the first day of the week, they came very early to the tomb, bringing the spices they had prepared.
2 But they found the stone rolled away from the tomb,
3 and when they entered, they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus.
4 While they were perplexed about this, look! two men in shining garments stood by them.
5 The women became frightened and kept their faces turned toward the ground, so the men said to them: “Why are you looking for the living one among the dead?
6 He is not here, but has been raised up. Recall how he spoke to you while he was yet in Galʹi·lee,
7 saying that the Son of man must be handed over to sinful men and be executed on the stake and on the third day rise.”
8 Then they remembered his words,
9 and they returned from the tomb and reported all these things to the Eleven and to all the rest.
10 They were Mary Magʹda·lene, Jo·anʹna, and Mary the mother of James. Also, the rest of the women with them were telling these things to the apostles.
11 However, these sayings seemed like nonsense to them, and they would not believe the women.
12 But Peter got up and ran to the tomb, and stooping forward, he saw only the linen cloths. So he went off, wondering to himself what had occurred.
13 But look! on that very day, two of them were traveling to a village named Em·maʹus, about seven miles from Jerusalem,
14 and they were conversing with each other about all these things that had happened.
15 Now as they were conversing and discussing these things, Jesus himself approached and began walking with them,
16 but their eyes were kept from recognizing him.
17 He said to them: “What are these matters that you are debating between yourselves as you walk along?” And they stood still, looking sad.
18 In answer the one named Cleʹo·pas said to him: “Are you a stranger dwelling alone in Jerusalem and do not know the things that have occurred there during these days?”
19 He asked them: “What things?” They said to him: “The things concerning Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ, who proved to be a prophet powerful in deed and word before God and all the people;
20 and how our chief priests and rulers handed him over to be sentenced to death, and they nailed him to the stake.
21 But we were hoping that this man was the one who was going to deliver Israel. Yes, and besides all these things, this is the third day since these things occurred.
22 Moreover, some women from among us also astonished us, for they went early to the tomb
23 and when they did not find his body, they came saying that they had also seen a supernatural sight of angels, who said he is alive.
24 Then some of those who were with us went off to the tomb, and they found it just as the women had said, but they did not see him.”
25 So he said to them: “O senseless ones and slow of heart to believe all the things the prophets have spoken!
26 Was it not necessary for the Christ to suffer these things and to enter into his glory?”
27 And starting with Moses and all the Prophets, he interpreted to them things pertaining to himself in all the Scriptures.
28 Finally they got close to the village to which they were traveling, and he made as if to travel on farther.
29 But they urged him to remain, saying: “Stay with us, because it is almost evening and the day is nearly over.” With that he went in to stay with them.
30 And as he was dining with them, he took the bread, blessed it, broke it, and began handing it to them.
31 At that their eyes were fully opened and they recognized him; but he disappeared from them.
32 And they said to each other: “Were not our hearts burning within us as he was speaking to us on the road, as he was fully opening up the Scriptures to us?”
33 And they got up in that very hour and returned to Jerusalem, and they found the Eleven and those assembled together with them,
34 who said: “For a fact the Lord was raised up, and he appeared to Simon!”
35 Then they related the events on the road and how he became known to them by the breaking of the bread.
36 While they were speaking of these things, he himself stood in their midst and said to them: “May you have peace.”
37 But because they were terrified and frightened, they imagined that they were seeing a spirit.
38 So he said to them: “Why are you troubled, and why have doubts come up in your hearts?
39 See my hands and my feet, that it is I myself; touch me and see, for a spirit does not have flesh and bones just as you see that I have.”
40 And as he said this, he showed them his hands and his feet.
41 But while they were still not believing for sheer joy and amazement, he said to them: “Do you have something there to eat?”
42 So they handed him a piece of broiled fish,
43 and he took it and ate it before their eyes.
44 He then said to them: “These are my words that I spoke to you while I was yet with you, that all the things written about me in the Law of Moses and in the Prophets and Psalms must be fulfilled.”
45 Then he opened up their minds fully to grasp the meaning of the Scriptures,
46 and he said to them, “This is what is written: that the Christ would suffer and rise from among the dead on the third day,
47 and on the basis of his name, repentance for forgiveness of sins would be preached in all the nations—starting out from Jerusalem.
48 You are to be witnesses of these things.
49 And look! I am sending upon you what my Father promised. You, though, stay in the city until you are clothed with power from on high.”
50 Then he led them out as far as Bethʹa·ny, and he lifted up his hands and blessed them.
51 As he was blessing them, he was parted from them and taken up to heaven.
52 And they did obeisance to him and returned to Jerusalem with great joy.
53 And they were continually in the temple, praising God.
1 In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was a god.
2 This one was in the beginning with God.
3 All things came into existence through him, and apart from him not even one thing came into existence. What has come into existence
4 by means of him was life, and the life was the light of men.
5 And the light is shining in the darkness, but the darkness has not overpowered it.
6 There came a man who was sent as a representative of God; his name was John.
7 This man came as a witness, in order to bear witness about the light, so that people of all sorts might believe through him.
8 He was not that light, but he was meant to bear witness about that light.
9 The true light that gives light to every sort of man was about to come into the world.
10 He was in the world, and the world came into existence through him, but the world did not know him.
11 He came to his own home, but his own people did not accept him.
12 However, to all who did receive him, he gave authority to become God’s children, because they were exercising faith in his name.
13 And they were born, not from blood or from a fleshly will or from man’s will, but from God.
14 So the Word became flesh and resided among us, and we had a view of his glory, a glory such as belongs to an only-begotten son from a father; and he was full of divine favor and truth.
15 (John bore witness about him, yes, he cried out: “This was the one of whom I said, ‘The one coming behind me has advanced in front of me, for he existed before me.’”)
16 For we all received from his fullness, even undeserved kindness upon undeserved kindness.
17 Because the Law was given through Moses, the undeserved kindness and the truth came to be through Jesus Christ.
18 No man has seen God at any time; the only-begotten god who is at the Father’s side is the one who has explained Him.
19 This is the witness John gave when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him: “Who are you?”
20 And he admitted it and did not deny it, saying: “I am not the Christ.”
21 And they asked him: “What, then? Are you E·liʹjah?” He replied: “I am not.” “Are you the Prophet?” And he answered: “No!”
22 So they said to him: “Who are you? Tell us so that we may give an answer to those who sent us. What do you say about yourself?”
23 He said: “I am a voice of someone crying out in the wilderness, ‘Make the way of Jehovah straight,’ just as Isaiah the prophet said.”
24 Now those sent were from the Pharisees.
25 So they questioned him and said to him: “Why, then, do you baptize if you are not the Christ or E·liʹjah or the Prophet?”
26 John answered them: “I baptize in water. One is standing among you whom you do not know,
27 the one coming behind me, the lace of whose sandal I am not worthy to untie.”
28 These things took place in Bethʹa·ny across the Jordan, where John was baptizing.
29 The next day he saw Jesus coming toward him, and he said: “See, the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world!
30 This is the one about whom I said: ‘Behind me there comes a man who has advanced in front of me, for he existed before me.’
31 Even I did not know him, but the reason why I came baptizing in water was so that he might be made manifest to Israel.”
32 John also bore witness, saying: “I viewed the spirit coming down as a dove out of heaven, and it remained upon him.
33 Even I did not know him, but the very One who sent me to baptize in water said to me: ‘Whoever it is upon whom you see the spirit coming down and remaining, this is the one who baptizes in holy spirit.’
34 And I have seen it, and I have given witness that this one is the Son of God.”
35 Again the next day, John was standing with two of his disciples,
36 and as he looked at Jesus walking, he said: “See, the Lamb of God!”
37 When the two disciples heard him say this, they followed Jesus.
38 Then Jesus turned, and seeing them following, he said to them: “What are you looking for?” They said to him: “Rabbi (which means, when translated, “Teacher”), where are you staying?”
39 He said to them: “Come, and you will see.” So they went and saw where he was staying, and they stayed with him that day; it was about the tenth hour.
40 Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, was one of the two who heard what John said and followed Jesus.
41 He first found his own brother Simon and said to him: “We have found the Mes·siʹah” (which means, when translated, “Christ”),
42 and he led him to Jesus. When Jesus looked at him, he said: “You are Simon, the son of John; you will be called Ceʹphas” (which is translated “Peter”).
43 The next day he wanted to leave for Galʹi·lee. Jesus then found Philip and said to him: “Be my follower.”
44 Now Philip was from Beth·saʹi·da, from the city of Andrew and Peter.
45 Philip found Na·thanʹa·el and said to him: “We have found the one of whom Moses, in the Law, and the Prophets wrote: Jesus, the son of Joseph, from Nazʹa·reth.”
46 But Na·thanʹa·el said to him: “Can anything good come out of Nazʹa·reth?” Philip said to him: “Come and see.”
47 Jesus saw Na·thanʹa·el coming toward him and said about him: “See, truly an Israelite in whom there is no deceit.”
48 Na·thanʹa·el said to him: “How do you know me?” Jesus answered him: “Before Philip called you, while you were under the fig tree, I saw you.”
49 Na·thanʹa·el responded: “Rabbi, you are the Son of God, you are King of Israel.”
50 Jesus answered him: “Do you believe because I told you I saw you under the fig tree? You will see things greater than these.”
51 He then said to him: “Most truly I say to you men, you will see heaven opened up and the angels of God ascending and descending to the Son of man.”
3 There was a man of the Pharisees named Nic·o·deʹmus, a ruler of the Jews.
2 This one came to him in the night and said to him: “Rabbi, we know that you have come from God as a teacher, for no one can perform these signs that you perform unless God is with him.”
3 In response Jesus said to him: “Most truly I say to you, unless anyone is born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.”
4 Nic·o·deʹmus said to him: “How can a man be born when he is old? He cannot enter into the womb of his mother a second time and be born, can he?”
5 Jesus answered: “Most truly I say to you, unless anyone is born from water and spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.
6 What has been born from the flesh is flesh, and what has been born from the spirit is spirit.
7 Do not be amazed because I told you: You people must be born again.
8 The wind blows where it wants to, and you hear the sound of it, but you do not know where it comes from and where it is going. So it is with everyone who has been born from the spirit.”
9 In answer Nic·o·deʹmus said to him: “How can these things be?”
10 Jesus replied: “Are you a teacher of Israel and yet do not know these things?
11 Most truly I say to you, what we know we speak, and what we have seen we bear witness to, but you do not receive the witness we give.
12 If I have told you earthly things and you still do not believe, how will you believe if I tell you heavenly things?
13 Moreover, no man has ascended into heaven but the one who descended from heaven, the Son of man.
14 And just as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so the Son of man must be lifted up,
15 so that everyone believing in him may have everlasting life.
16 “For God loved the world so much that he gave his only-begotten Son, so that everyone exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life.
17 For God did not send his Son into the world for him to judge the world, but for the world to be saved through him.
18 Whoever exercises faith in him is not to be judged. Whoever does not exercise faith has been judged already, because he has not exercised faith in the name of the only-begotten Son of God.
19 Now this is the basis for judgment: that the light has come into the world, but men have loved the darkness rather than the light, for their works were wicked.
20 For whoever practices vile things hates the light and does not come to the light, so that his works may not be reproved.
21 But whoever does what is true comes to the light, so that his works may be made manifest as having been done in harmony with God.”
22 After this Jesus and his disciples went into the Ju·deʹan countryside, and there he spent some time with them and was baptizing.
23 But John too was baptizing in Aeʹnon near Saʹlim, because there was a great quantity of water there, and people kept coming and were being baptized;
24 for John had not yet been thrown into prison.
25 Now the disciples of John had a dispute with a Jew concerning purification.
26 So they came to John and said to him: “Rabbi, the man who was with you across the Jordan, about whom you bore witness, see, this one is baptizing, and all are going to him.”
27 In answer John said: “A man cannot receive a single thing unless it has been given him from heaven.
28 You yourselves bear me witness that I said, ‘I am not the Christ, but I have been sent ahead of that one.’
29 Whoever has the bride is the bridegroom. But the friend of the bridegroom, when he stands and hears him, has a great deal of joy on account of the voice of the bridegroom. So my joy has been made complete.
30 That one must keep on increasing, but I must keep on decreasing.”
31 The one who comes from above is over all others. The one who is from the earth is from the earth and speaks of things of the earth. The one who comes from heaven is over all others.
32 He bears witness to what he has seen and heard, but no man accepts his witness.
33 Whoever has accepted his witness has put his seal to it that God is true.
34 For the one whom God sent speaks the sayings of God, for He does not give the spirit sparingly.
35 The Father loves the Son and has given all things into his hand.
36 The one who exercises faith in the Son has everlasting life; the one who disobeys the Son will not see life, but the wrath of God remains upon him.
4 When the Lord became aware that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus was making and baptizing more disciples than John—
2 although Jesus himself did no baptizing but his disciples did—
3 he left Ju·deʹa and departed again for Galʹi·lee.
4 But it was necessary for him to go through Sa·marʹi·a.
5 So he came to a city of Sa·marʹi·a called Syʹchar, near the field that Jacob had given to his son Joseph.
6 In fact, Jacob’s well was there. Now Jesus, tired out as he was from the journey, was sitting at the well. It was about the sixth hour.
7 A woman of Sa·marʹi·a came to draw water. Jesus said to her: “Give me a drink.”
8 (For his disciples had gone off into the city to buy food.)
9 So the Sa·marʹi·tan woman said to him: “How is it that you, despite being a Jew, ask me for a drink even though I am a Sa·marʹi·tan woman?” (For Jews have no dealings with Sa·marʹi·tans.)
10 In answer Jesus said to her: “If you had known of the free gift of God and who it is who says to you, ‘Give me a drink,’ you would have asked him, and he would have given you living water.”
11 She said to him: “Sir, you do not even have a bucket for drawing water, and the well is deep. From what source, then, do you have this living water?
12 You are not greater than our forefather Jacob, who gave us the well and who together with his sons and his cattle drank out of it, are you?”
13 In answer Jesus said to her: “Everyone drinking from this water will get thirsty again.
14 Whoever drinks from the water that I will give him will never get thirsty at all, but the water that I will give him will become in him a spring of water bubbling up to impart everlasting life.”
15 The woman said to him: “Sir, give me this water, so that I may neither thirst nor keep coming over to this place to draw water.”
16 He said to her: “Go, call your husband and come to this place.”
17 The woman replied: “I do not have a husband.” Jesus said to her: “You are right in saying, ‘I do not have a husband.’
18 For you have had five husbands, and the man you now have is not your husband. This you have said truthfully.”
19 The woman said to him: “Sir, I see that you are a prophet.
20 Our forefathers worshipped on this mountain, but you people say that in Jerusalem is the place where people must worship.”
21 Jesus said to her: “Believe me, woman, the hour is coming when neither on this mountain nor in Jerusalem will you worship the Father.
22 You worship what you do not know; we worship what we know, because salvation begins with the Jews.
23 Nevertheless, the hour is coming, and it is now, when the true worshippers will worship the Father with spirit and truth, for indeed, the Father is looking for ones like these to worship him.
24 God is a Spirit, and those worshipping him must worship with spirit and truth.”
25 The woman said to him: “I know that Mes·siʹah is coming, who is called Christ. Whenever that one comes, he will declare all things to us openly.”
26 Jesus said to her: “I am he, the one speaking to you.”
27 Just then his disciples arrived, and they were surprised because he was speaking with a woman. Of course, no one said: “What are you looking for?” or “Why are you talking to her?”
28 So the woman left her water jar and went off into the city and told the people:
29 “Come and see a man who told me everything I did. Could this not perhaps be the Christ?”
30 They left the city and began coming to him.
31 Meanwhile, the disciples were urging him: “Rabbi, eat.”
32 But he said to them: “I have food to eat that you do not know about.”
33 So the disciples said to one another: “No one brought him anything to eat, did he?”
34 Jesus said to them: “My food is to do the will of him who sent me and to finish his work.
35 Do you not say that there are yet four months before the harvest comes? Look! I say to you: Lift up your eyes and view the fields, that they are white for harvesting. Already
36 the reaper is receiving wages and gathering fruit for everlasting life, so that the sower and the reaper may rejoice together.
37 For in this respect the saying is true: One is the sower and another the reaper.
38 I sent you to reap what you did not labor on. Others have labored, and you have entered into the benefit of their labor.”
39 Many of the Sa·marʹi·tans from that city put faith in him because of the word of the woman who bore witness, saying: “He told me all the things I did.”
40 So when the Sa·marʹi·tans came to him, they asked him to stay with them, and he stayed there two days.
41 As a result, many more believed because of what he said,
42 and they said to the woman: “We no longer believe just because of what you said; for we have heard for ourselves, and we know that this man really is the savior of the world.”
43 After the two days, he left there for Galʹi·lee.
44 Jesus himself, however, bore witness that a prophet has no honor in his own homeland.
45 So when he arrived in Galʹi·lee, the Gal·i·leʹans welcomed him, because they had seen all the things he did in Jerusalem at the festival, for they too had gone to the festival.
46 Then he came again to Caʹna of Galʹi·lee, where he had turned the water into wine. Now there was a royal official whose son was sick in Ca·perʹna·um.
47 When this man heard that Jesus had come out of Ju·deʹa into Galʹi·lee, he went to him and asked him to come down and heal his son, for he was at the point of dying.
48 But Jesus said to him: “Unless you people see signs and wonders, you will never believe.”
49 The royal official said to him: “Lord, come down before my young child dies.”
50 Jesus said to him: “Go your way; your son lives.” The man believed the word that Jesus spoke to him, and he left.
51 But while he was on his way down, his slaves met him to say that his boy was alive.
52 So he asked them at what hour he got better. They replied to him: “The fever left him yesterday at the seventh hour.”
53 The father then knew that it was in the very hour that Jesus had said to him: “Your son lives.” So he and his whole household believed.
54 This was the second sign Jesus performed when he came from Ju·deʹa into Galʹi·lee.
7 After this Jesus continued traveling about in Galʹi·lee, for he did not want to do so in Ju·deʹa because the Jews were seeking to kill him.
2 However, the Jewish Festival of Tabernacles was near.
3 So his brothers said to him: “Leave here and go into Ju·deʹa, so that your disciples may also see the works you are doing.
4 For no one does anything in secret when he seeks to be known publicly. If you are doing these things, show yourself to the world.”
5 His brothers were, in fact, not exercising faith in him.
6 So Jesus said to them: “My time has not yet arrived, but your time is always at hand.
7 The world has no reason to hate you, but it hates me, because I bear witness about it that its works are wicked.
8 You go up to the festival; I am not yet going up to this festival, because my time has not yet fully come.”
9 So after he told them these things, he remained in Galʹi·lee.
10 But when his brothers had gone up to the festival, then he also went up, not openly but in secret.
11 So the Jews began looking for him at the festival and saying: “Where is that man?”
12 And there was a lot of subdued talk about him among the crowds. Some would say: “He is a good man.” Others would say: “He is not. He misleads the crowd.”
13 Of course, no one would speak about him publicly because of fear of the Jews.
14 When the festival was half over, Jesus went up into the temple and began teaching.
15 And the Jews were astonished, saying: “How does this man have such a knowledge of the Scriptures when he has not studied at the schools?”
16 Jesus, in turn, answered them and said: “What I teach is not mine, but belongs to him who sent me.
17 If anyone desires to do His will, he will know whether the teaching is from God or I speak of my own originality.
18 Whoever speaks of his own originality is seeking his own glory; but whoever seeks the glory of the one who sent him, this one is true and there is no unrighteousness in him.
19 Moses gave you the Law, did he not? But not one of you obeys the Law. Why are you seeking to kill me?”
20 The crowd answered: “You have a demon. Who is seeking to kill you?”
21 In answer Jesus said to them: “One deed I performed, and you are all surprised.
22 For this reason Moses has given you circumcision—not that it is from Moses, but it is from the forefathers—and you circumcise a man on a sabbath.
23 If a man receives circumcision on a sabbath so that the Law of Moses may not be broken, are you violently angry at me because I made a man completely well on a sabbath?
24 Stop judging by the outward appearance, but judge with righteous judgment.”
25 Then some of the inhabitants of Jerusalem began to say: “This is the man they are seeking to kill, is it not?
26 And yet see! he is speaking in public, and they say nothing to him. Have the rulers come to know for certain that this is the Christ?
27 On the contrary, we know where this man is from; yet when the Christ comes, no one is to know where he is from.”
28 Then as he was teaching in the temple, Jesus called out: “You know me and you know where I am from. And I have not come of my own initiative, but the One who sent me is real, and you do not know him.
29 I know him, because I am a representative from him, and that One sent me.”
30 So they began seeking to get hold of him, but no one laid a hand on him, for his hour had not yet come.
31 Still, many of the crowd put faith in him, and they were saying: “When the Christ comes, he will not perform more signs than this man has done, will he?”
32 The Pharisees heard the crowd murmuring these things about him, and the chief priests and the Pharisees sent officers to seize him.
33 Jesus then said: “I will be with you a little while longer before I go to the One who sent me.
34 You will look for me, but you will not find me, and where I am you cannot come.”
35 Therefore, the Jews said among themselves: “Where does this man intend to go, so that we will not find him? He does not intend to go to the Jews dispersed among the Greeks and teach the Greeks, does he?
36 What does he mean when he says, ‘You will look for me, but you will not find me, and where I am you cannot come’?”
37 On the last day, the great day of the festival, Jesus stood up and he called out: “If anyone is thirsty, let him come to me and drink.
38 Whoever puts faith in me, just as the scripture has said: ‘From deep within him streams of living water will flow.’”
39 However, he said this concerning the spirit, which those who put faith in him were about to receive; for as yet there was no spirit, because Jesus had not yet been glorified.
40 Some in the crowd who heard these words began saying: “This really is the Prophet.”
41 Others were saying: “This is the Christ.” But some were saying: “The Christ is not coming out of Galʹi·lee, is he?
42 Does the scripture not say that the Christ is coming from the offspring of David and from Bethʹle·hem, the village where David was?”
43 So a division over him arose among the crowd.
44 Some of them, though, wanted to seize him, but no one laid his hands on him.
45 Then the officers went back to the chief priests and Pharisees, and the latter said to them: “Why did you not bring him in?”
46 The officers replied: “Never has any man spoken like this.”
47 In turn the Pharisees answered: “You have not been misled also, have you?
48 Not one of the rulers or of the Pharisees has put faith in him, has he?
49 But this crowd who do not know the Law are accursed people.”
50 Nic·o·deʹmus, who had come to him previously and who was one of them, said to them:
51 “Our Law does not judge a man unless it first hears from him and learns what he is doing, does it?”
52 In answer they said to him: “You are not also out of Galʹi·lee, are you? Search and see that no prophet is to be raised up out of Galʹi·lee.”
9 As he was passing along, he saw a man who had been blind from birth.
2 And his disciples asked him: “Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, so that he was born blind?”
3 Jesus answered: “Neither this man sinned nor his parents, but it was so that the works of God might be made manifest in his case.
4 We must do the works of the One who sent me while it is day; the night is coming when no man can work.
5 As long as I am in the world, I am the world’s light.”
6 After he said these things, he spat on the ground and made a paste with the saliva, and he smeared the paste on the man’s eyes
7 and said to him: “Go wash in the pool of Si·loʹam” (which is translated “Sent Forth”). And he went and washed, and came back seeing.
8 Then the neighbors and those who formerly used to see that he was a beggar began to say: “This is the man who used to sit and beg, is it not?”
9 Some were saying: “This is he.” Others were saying: “No, but he looks like him.” The man kept saying: “I am he.”
10 So they asked him: “How, then, were your eyes opened?”
11 He answered: “The man called Jesus made a paste and smeared it on my eyes and said to me, ‘Go to Si·loʹam and wash.’ So I went and washed and gained sight.”
12 At this they said to him: “Where is that man?” He said: “I do not know.”
13 They led the formerly blind man to the Pharisees.
14 Incidentally, the day that Jesus made the paste and opened his eyes was the Sabbath.
15 So this time the Pharisees also began asking the man how he gained sight. He said to them: “He put a paste on my eyes, and I washed, and I can see.”
16 Some of the Pharisees then began to say: “This is not a man from God, for he does not observe the Sabbath.” Others said: “How can a man who is a sinner perform signs of that sort?” So there was a division among them.
17 And again they said to the blind man: “What do you say about him, since it was your eyes that he opened?” The man said: “He is a prophet.”
18 However, the Jews did not believe that he had been blind and had gained sight, until they called the parents of the man who could now see.
19 And they asked them: “Is this your son who you say was born blind? How, then, does he now see?”
20 His parents answered: “We know that this is our son and that he was born blind.
21 But how it is that he now sees, we do not know; or who opened his eyes, we do not know. Ask him. He is of age. He must speak for himself.”
22 His parents said these things because they were in fear of the Jews, for the Jews had already come to an agreement that if anyone acknowledged him as Christ, that person should be expelled from the synagogue.
23 This is why his parents said: “He is of age. Question him.”
24 So a second time they called the man who had been blind and said to him: “Give glory to God; we know that this man is a sinner.”
25 He answered: “Whether he is a sinner, I do not know. One thing I do know, that I was blind, but now I can see.”
26 Then they said to him: “What did he do to you? How did he open your eyes?”
27 He answered them: “I told you already, and yet you did not listen. Why do you want to hear it again? You do not want to become his disciples also, do you?”
28 At this they scornfully told him: “You are a disciple of that man, but we are disciples of Moses.
29 We know that God has spoken to Moses, but as for this man, we do not know where he is from.”
30 The man answered them: “This is certainly amazing, that you do not know where he is from, and yet he opened my eyes.
31 We know that God does not listen to sinners, but if anyone is God-fearing and does his will, he listens to this one.
32 From of old it has never been heard that anyone opened the eyes of one born blind.
33 If this man were not from God, he could do nothing at all.”
34 In answer they said to him: “You were altogether born in sin, and yet are you teaching us?” And they threw him out!
35 Jesus heard that they had thrown him out, and on finding him, he said: “Are you putting faith in the Son of man?”
36 The man answered: “And who is he, sir, so that I may put faith in him?”
37 Jesus said to him: “You have seen him, and in fact, he is the one speaking with you.”
38 He said: “I do put faith in him, Lord.” And he did obeisance to him.
39 Jesus then said: “For this judgment I came into this world, that those not seeing might see and those seeing might become blind.”
40 Those of the Pharisees who were with him heard these things, and they said to him: “We are not blind also, are we?”
41 Jesus said to them: “If you were blind, you would have no sin. But now you say, ‘We see.’ Your sin remains.”
10 “Most truly I say to you, the one who does not enter into the sheepfold through the door but climbs in by another way, that one is a thief and a plunderer.
2 But the one who enters through the door is the shepherd of the sheep.
3 The doorkeeper opens to this one, and the sheep listen to his voice. He calls his own sheep by name and leads them out.
4 When he has brought all his own out, he goes ahead of them, and the sheep follow him, because they know his voice.
5 They will by no means follow a stranger but will flee from him, because they do not know the voice of strangers.”
6 Jesus spoke this comparison to them, but they did not understand what he was saying to them.
7 So Jesus said again: “Most truly I say to you, I am the door for the sheep.
8 All those who have come in place of me are thieves and plunderers; but the sheep have not listened to them.
9 I am the door; whoever enters through me will be saved, and that one will go in and out and find pasturage.
10 The thief does not come unless it is to steal and slay and destroy. I have come that they may have life and have it in abundance.
11 I am the fine shepherd; the fine shepherd surrenders his life in behalf of the sheep.
12 The hired man, who is not a shepherd and to whom the sheep do not belong, sees the wolf coming and abandons the sheep and flees—and the wolf snatches them and scatters them—
13 because he is a hired man and does not care for the sheep.
14 I am the fine shepherd. I know my sheep and my sheep know me,
15 just as the Father knows me and I know the Father; and I surrender my life in behalf of the sheep.
16 “And I have other sheep, which are not of this fold; those too I must bring in, and they will listen to my voice, and they will become one flock, one shepherd.
17 This is why the Father loves me, because I surrender my life, so that I may receive it again.
18 No man takes it away from me, but I surrender it of my own initiative. I have authority to surrender it, and I have authority to receive it again. This commandment I received from my Father.”
19 A division again resulted among the Jews because of these words.
20 Many of them were saying: “He has a demon and is out of his mind. Why do you listen to him?”
21 Others said: “These are not the sayings of a demonized man. A demon cannot open blind people’s eyes, can it?”
22 At that time the Festival of Dedication took place in Jerusalem. It was wintertime,
23 and Jesus was walking in the temple in the colonnade of Solʹo·mon.
24 Then the Jews surrounded him and began to say to him: “How long are you going to keep us in suspense? If you are the Christ, tell us plainly.”
25 Jesus answered them: “I told you, and yet you do not believe. The works that I am doing in my Father’s name, these bear witness about me.
26 But you do not believe, because you are not my sheep.
27 My sheep listen to my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.
28 I give them everlasting life, and they will by no means ever be destroyed, and no one will snatch them out of my hand.
29 What my Father has given me is something greater than all other things, and no one can snatch them out of the hand of the Father.
30 I and the Father are one.”
31 Once again the Jews picked up stones to stone him.
32 Jesus replied to them: “I displayed to you many fine works from the Father. For which of those works are you stoning me?”
33 The Jews answered him: “We are stoning you, not for a fine work, but for blasphemy; for you, although being a man, make yourself a god.”
34 Jesus answered them: “Is it not written in your Law, ‘I said: “You are gods”’?
35 If he called ‘gods’ those against whom the word of God came—and yet the scripture cannot be nullified—
36 do you say to me whom the Father sanctified and sent into the world, ‘You blaspheme,’ because I said, ‘I am God’s Son’?
37 If I am not doing the works of my Father, do not believe me.
38 But if I am doing them, even though you do not believe me, believe the works, so that you may come to know and may continue knowing that the Father is in union with me and I am in union with the Father.”
39 So they tried again to seize him, but he escaped from their reach.
40 And he went away again across the Jordan to the place where John was baptizing at first, and he stayed there.
41 And many people came to him and began saying: “John did not perform a single sign, but all the things John said about this man were true.”
42 And many put faith in him there.
13 Now because he knew before the festival of the Passover that his hour had come for him to leave this world and go to the Father, Jesus, having loved his own who were in the world, loved them to the end.
2 The evening meal was going on, and the Devil had already put it into the heart of Judas Is·carʹi·ot, the son of Simon, to betray him.
3 So Jesus, knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands and that he came from God and was going to God,
4 got up from the evening meal and laid aside his outer garments. And taking a towel, he wrapped it around his waist.
5 After that he put water into a basin and started to wash the feet of the disciples and to dry them off with the towel that was wrapped around him.
6 Then he came to Simon Peter. He said to him: “Lord, are you washing my feet?”
7 Jesus answered him: “What I am doing you do not understand now, but you will understand after these things.”
8 Peter said to him: “You will certainly never wash my feet.” Jesus answered him: “Unless I wash you, you have no share with me.”
9 Simon Peter said to him: “Lord, wash not only my feet but also my hands and my head.”
10 Jesus said to him: “Whoever has bathed does not need to have more than his feet washed, but is completely clean. And you men are clean, but not all of you.”
11 For he knew the man who was betraying him. This is why he said: “Not all of you are clean.”
12 When, now, he had washed their feet and had put his outer garments on, he again reclined at the table and said to them: “Do you understand what I have done to you?
13 You address me as ‘Teacher’ and ‘Lord,’ and you are correct, for I am such.
14 Therefore, if I, the Lord and Teacher, washed your feet, you also should wash the feet of one another.
15 For I set the pattern for you, that just as I did to you, you should also do.
16 Most truly I say to you, a slave is not greater than his master, nor is one who is sent greater than the one who sent him.
17 If you know these things, happy you are if you do them.
18 I am not talking about all of you; I know the ones I have chosen. But this was so that the scripture might be fulfilled: ‘The one who was eating my bread has lifted his heel against me.’
19 From this moment on, I am telling you before it occurs, so that when it does occur you may believe that I am he.
20 Most truly I say to you, whoever receives anyone I send receives me also, and whoever receives me receives also the One who sent me.”
21 After saying these things, Jesus became troubled in spirit, and he bore witness, saying: “Most truly I say to you, one of you will betray me.”
22 The disciples began to look at one another, being at a loss as to which one he was talking about.
23 One of the disciples, the one whom Jesus loved, was reclining close to Jesus.
24 Therefore, Simon Peter nodded to this one and said to him: “Tell us whom he is talking about.”
25 So the latter leaned back on the chest of Jesus and said to him: “Lord, who is it?”
26 Jesus answered: “It is the one to whom I will give the piece of bread that I dip.” So after dipping the bread, he took it and gave it to Judas, the son of Simon Is·carʹi·ot.
27 After Judas took the piece of bread, then Satan entered into him. So Jesus said to him: “What you are doing, do it more quickly.”
28 However, none of those reclining at the table knew why he said this to him.
29 Some, in fact, were thinking that since Judas was holding the money box, Jesus was telling him, “Buy what we need for the festival,” or that he should give something to the poor.
30 So after he received the piece of bread, he went out immediately. And it was night.
31 When, therefore, he had gone out, Jesus said: “Now the Son of man is glorified, and God is glorified in connection with him.
32 God himself will glorify him, and he will glorify him immediately.
33 Little children, I am with you a little longer. You will look for me; and just as I said to the Jews, ‘Where I go you cannot come,’ I now say it also to you.
34 I am giving you a new commandment, that you love one another; just as I have loved you, you also love one another.
35 By this all will know that you are my disciples—if you have love among yourselves.”
36 Simon Peter said to him: “Lord, where are you going?” Jesus answered: “Where I am going, you cannot follow me now, but you will follow later.”
37 Peter said to him: “Lord, why is it I cannot follow you now? I will surrender my life in your behalf.”
38 Jesus answered: “Will you surrender your life in my behalf? Most truly I say to you, a rooster will by no means crow until you have disowned me three times.”
14 “Do not let your hearts be troubled. Exercise faith in God; exercise faith also in me.
2 In the house of my Father are many dwelling places. Otherwise, I would have told you, for I am going my way to prepare a place for you.
3 Also, if I go my way and prepare a place for you, I will come again and will receive you home to myself, so that where I am you also may be.
4 And where I am going, you know the way.”
5 Thomas said to him: “Lord, we do not know where you are going. How can we know the way?”
6 Jesus said to him: “I am the way and the truth and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me.
7 If you men had known me, you would have known my Father also; from this moment on you know him and have seen him.”
8 Philip said to him: “Lord, show us the Father, and it is enough for us.”
9 Jesus said to him: “Even after I have been with you men for such a long time, Philip, have you not come to know me? Whoever has seen me has seen the Father also. How is it you say, ‘Show us the Father’?
10 Do you not believe that I am in union with the Father and the Father is in union with me? The things I say to you I do not speak of my own originality, but the Father who remains in union with me is doing his works.
11 Believe me that I am in union with the Father and the Father is in union with me; otherwise, believe because of the works themselves.
12 Most truly I say to you, whoever exercises faith in me will also do the works that I do; and he will do works greater than these, because I am going my way to the Father.
13 Also, whatever you ask in my name, I will do this, so that the Father may be glorified in connection with the Son.
14 If you ask anything in my name, I will do it.
15 “If you love me, you will observe my commandments.
16 And I will ask the Father and he will give you another helper to be with you forever,
17 the spirit of the truth, which the world cannot receive, because it neither sees it nor knows it. You know it, because it remains with you and is in you.
18 I will not leave you bereaved. I am coming to you.
19 In a little while the world will see me no more, but you will see me, because I live and you will live.
20 In that day you will know that I am in union with my Father and you are in union with me and I am in union with you.
21 Whoever has my commandments and observes them is the one who loves me. In turn, whoever loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him and will clearly show myself to him.”
22 Judas, not Is·carʹi·ot, said to him: “Lord, what has happened that you intend to show yourself clearly to us and not to the world?”
23 In answer Jesus said to him: “If anyone loves me, he will observe my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our dwelling with him.
24 Whoever does not love me does not observe my words. The word that you are hearing is not mine, but belongs to the Father who sent me.
25 “I have spoken these things to you while I am still with you.
26 But the helper, the holy spirit, which the Father will send in my name, that one will teach you all things and bring back to your minds all the things I told you.
27 I leave you peace; I give you my peace. I do not give it to you the way that the world gives it. Do not let your hearts be troubled nor let them shrink out of fear.
28 You heard that I said to you, ‘I am going away and I am coming back to you.’ If you loved me, you would rejoice that I am going to the Father, for the Father is greater than I am.
29 So now I have told you before it occurs, so that you may believe when it does occur.
30 I will not speak with you much more, for the ruler of the world is coming, and he has no hold on me.
31 But for the world to know that I love the Father, I am doing just as the Father has commanded me to do. Get up, let us go from here.
15 “I am the true vine, and my Father is the cultivator.
2 He takes away every branch in me not bearing fruit, and he cleans every one bearing fruit, so that it may bear more fruit.
3 You are already clean because of the word that I have spoken to you.
4 Remain in union with me, and I will remain in union with you. Just as the branch cannot bear fruit by itself unless it remains in the vine, neither can you unless you remain in union with me.
5 I am the vine; you are the branches. Whoever remains in union with me and I in union with him, this one bears much fruit; for apart from me you can do nothing at all.
6 If anyone does not remain in union with me, he is thrown out like a branch and dries up. And men gather those branches and throw them into the fire, and they are burned.
7 If you remain in union with me and my sayings remain in you, ask whatever you wish and it will take place for you.
8 My Father is glorified in this, that you keep bearing much fruit and prove yourselves my disciples.
9 Just as the Father has loved me, so I have loved you; remain in my love.
10 If you observe my commandments, you will remain in my love, just as I have observed the commandments of the Father and remain in his love.
11 “These things I have spoken to you, so that my joy may be in you and your joy may be made full.
12 This is my commandment, that you love one another just as I have loved you.
13 No one has love greater than this, that someone should surrender his life in behalf of his friends.
14 You are my friends if you do what I am commanding you.
15 I no longer call you slaves, because a slave does not know what his master does. But I have called you friends, because I have made known to you all the things I have heard from my Father.
16 You did not choose me, but I chose you, and I appointed you to go and keep bearing fruit and that your fruit should remain, so that no matter what you ask the Father in my name, he may give it to you.
17 “These things I command you, that you love one another.
18 If the world hates you, you know that it has hated me before it hated you.
19 If you were part of the world, the world would be fond of what is its own. Now because you are no part of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, for this reason the world hates you.
20 Keep in mind the word I said to you: A slave is not greater than his master. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have observed my word, they will also observe yours.
21 But they will do all these things against you on account of my name, because they do not know the One who sent me.
22 If I had not come and spoken to them, they would have no sin. But now they have no excuse for their sin.
23 Whoever hates me also hates my Father.
24 If I had not done among them the works that no one else did, they would have no sin; but now they have both seen me and hated me as well as my Father.
25 But this happened in order to fulfill the word written in their Law: ‘They hated me without cause.’
26 When the helper comes that I will send you from the Father, the spirit of the truth, which comes from the Father, that one will bear witness about me;
27 and you, in turn, are to bear witness, because you have been with me from the beginning.
16 “I have said these things to you so that you may not be stumbled.
2 Men will expel you from the synagogue. In fact, the hour is coming when everyone who kills you will think he has offered a sacred service to God.
3 But they will do these things because they have not come to know either the Father or me.
4 Nevertheless, I have told you these things so that when the hour for them to happen arrives, you will remember that I told them to you. “I did not tell you these things at first, because I was with you.
5 But now I am going to the One who sent me; yet not one of you asks me, ‘Where are you going?’
6 But because I have told you these things, grief has filled your hearts.
7 Nevertheless, I am telling you the truth, it is for your benefit that I am going away. For if I do not go away, the helper will not come to you; but if I do go, I will send him to you.
8 And when that one comes, he will give the world convincing evidence concerning sin and concerning righteousness and concerning judgment:
9 first concerning sin, because they are not exercising faith in me;
10 then concerning righteousness, because I am going to the Father and you will see me no longer;
11 then concerning judgment, because the ruler of this world has been judged.
12 “I still have many things to say to you, but you are not able to bear them now.
13 However, when that one comes, the spirit of the truth, he will guide you into all the truth, for he will not speak of his own initiative, but what he hears he will speak, and he will declare to you the things to come.
14 That one will glorify me, because he will receive from what is mine and will declare it to you.
15 All the things that the Father has are mine. That is why I said he receives from what is mine and declares it to you.
16 In a little while you will see me no longer, and again, in a little while you will see me.”
17 At that some of his disciples said to one another: “What does he mean by saying to us, ‘In a little while you will not see me, and again, in a little while you will see me,’ and, ‘because I am going to the Father’?”
18 So they were saying: “What does he mean by saying, ‘a little while’? We do not know what he is talking about.”
19 Jesus knew they wanted to question him, so he said to them: “Are you asking one another this because I said: ‘In a little while you will not see me, and again, in a little while you will see me’?
20 Most truly I say to you, you will weep and wail, but the world will rejoice; you will be grieved, but your grief will be turned into joy.
21 When a woman is giving birth, she has grief because her hour has come, but when she has given birth to the child, she remembers the tribulation no more because of the joy that a man has been born into the world.
22 So you also, now you have grief; but I will see you again, and your hearts will rejoice, and no one will take away your joy.
23 In that day you will ask me no question at all. Most truly I say to you, if you ask the Father for anything, he will give it to you in my name.
24 Until now you have not asked for a single thing in my name. Ask and you will receive, so that your joy may be complete.
25 “I have spoken these things to you in comparisons. The hour is coming when I will no longer speak to you in comparisons, but I will tell you plainly about the Father.
26 In that day you will make request of the Father in my name; in saying this, I do not mean that I will make request for you.
27 For the Father himself has affection for you, because you have had affection for me and have believed that I came as God’s representative.
28 I came as the Father’s representative and have come into the world. Now I am leaving the world and am going to the Father.”
29 His disciples said: “See! Now you are speaking plainly and are not using comparisons.
30 Now we know that you know all things and you do not need to have anyone question you. By this we believe that you came from God.”
31 Jesus answered them: “Do you believe now?
32 Look! The hour is coming, indeed, it has come, when each one of you will be scattered to his own house and you will leave me alone. But I am not alone, because the Father is with me.
33 I have said these things to you so that by means of me you may have peace. In the world you will have tribulation, but take courage! I have conquered the world.”
17 Jesus spoke these things, and raising his eyes to heaven, he said: “Father, the hour has come. Glorify your son so that your son may glorify you,
2 just as you have given him authority over all flesh, so that he may give everlasting life to all those whom you have given to him.
3 This means everlasting life, their coming to know you, the only true God, and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ.
4 I have glorified you on the earth, having finished the work you have given me to do.
5 So now, Father, glorify me at your side with the glory that I had alongside you before the world was.
6 “I have made your name manifest to the men whom you gave me out of the world. They were yours, and you gave them to me, and they have observed your word.
7 Now they have come to know that all the things you gave me are from you;
8 because I have given them the sayings that you gave me, and they have accepted them and have certainly come to know that I came as your representative, and they have believed that you sent me.
9 I make request concerning them; I make request, not concerning the world, but concerning those whom you have given me, because they are yours;
10 and all my things are yours and yours are mine, and I have been glorified among them.
11 “I am no longer in the world, but they are in the world, and I am coming to you. Holy Father, watch over them on account of your own name, which you have given me, so that they may be one just as we are one.
12 When I was with them, I used to watch over them on account of your own name, which you have given me; and I have protected them, and not one of them is destroyed except the son of destruction, so that the scripture might be fulfilled.
13 But now I am coming to you, and I am saying these things in the world, so that they may have my joy made complete in themselves.
14 I have given your word to them, but the world has hated them, because they are no part of the world, just as I am no part of the world.
15 “I do not request that you take them out of the world, but that you watch over them because of the wicked one.
16 They are no part of the world, just as I am no part of the world.
17 Sanctify them by means of the truth; your word is truth.
18 Just as you sent me into the world, I also sent them into the world.
19 And I am sanctifying myself in their behalf, so that they also may be sanctified by means of truth.
20 “I make request, not concerning these only, but also concerning those putting faith in me through their word,
21 so that they may all be one, just as you, Father, are in union with me and I am in union with you, that they also may be in union with us, so that the world may believe that you sent me.
22 I have given them the glory that you have given me, in order that they may be one just as we are one.
23 I in union with them and you in union with me, in order that they may be perfected into one, so that the world may know that you sent me and that you loved them just as you loved me.
24 Father, I want those whom you have given me to be with me where I am, in order that they may look upon my glory that you have given me, because you loved me before the founding of the world.
25 Righteous Father, the world has, indeed, not come to know you, but I know you, and these have come to know that you sent me.
26 I have made your name known to them and will make it known, so that the love with which you loved me may be in them and I in union with them.”
18 After he said these things, Jesus went out with his disciples across the Kidʹron Valley to where there was a garden, and he and his disciples went into it.
2 Now Judas, his betrayer, also knew the place, because Jesus had often met there with his disciples.
3 So Judas brought the detachment of soldiers and officers of the chief priests and of the Pharisees and came there with torches and lamps and weapons.
4 Then Jesus, knowing all the things that were going to happen to him, stepped forward and said to them: “Whom are you looking for?”
5 They answered him: “Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ.” He said to them: “I am he.” Now Judas, his betrayer, was also standing with them.
6 However, when Jesus said to them, “I am he,” they drew back and fell to the ground.
7 So he asked them again: “Whom are you looking for?” They said: “Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ.”
8 Jesus answered: “I told you that I am he. So if you are looking for me, let these men go.”
9 This was to fulfill what he had said: “Of those whom you have given me, I have not lost a single one.”
10 Then Simon Peter, who had a sword, drew it and struck the slave of the high priest, cutting off his right ear. The name of the slave was Malchus.
11 Jesus, however, said to Peter: “Put the sword into its sheath. Should I not drink the cup that the Father has given me?”
12 Then the soldiers and the military commander and the officers of the Jews seized Jesus and bound him.
13 They led him first to Anʹnas, for he was the father-in-law of Caʹia·phas, who was high priest that year.
14 Caʹia·phas was, in fact, the one who had advised the Jews that it was to their benefit for one man to die in behalf of the people.
15 Now Simon Peter, as well as another disciple, was following Jesus. That disciple was known to the high priest, and he went with Jesus into the courtyard of the high priest,
16 but Peter was standing outside at the door. So the other disciple, who was known to the high priest, went out and spoke to the doorkeeper and brought Peter in.
17 The servant girl who was the doorkeeper then said to Peter: “You are not also one of this man’s disciples, are you?” He said: “I am not.”
18 Now the slaves and the officers were standing around a charcoal fire they had made, because it was cold and they were warming themselves. Peter also was standing with them and warming himself.
19 So the chief priest questioned Jesus about his disciples and about his teaching.
20 Jesus answered him: “I have spoken to the world publicly. I always taught in a synagogue and in the temple, where all the Jews come together, and I said nothing in secret.
21 Why do you question me? Question those who have heard what I told them. See! These know what I said.”
22 After he said these things, one of the officers who was standing by gave Jesus a slap in the face and said: “Is that the way you answer the chief priest?”
23 Jesus answered him: “If I said something wrong, bear witness about the wrong; but if what I said was right, why do you hit me?”
24 Then Anʹnas sent him away bound to Caʹia·phas the high priest.
25 Now Simon Peter was standing there warming himself. Then they said to him: “You are not also one of his disciples, are you?” He denied it and said: “I am not.”
26 One of the slaves of the high priest, who was a relative of the man whose ear Peter had cut off, said: “I saw you in the garden with him, did I not?”
27 However, Peter denied it again, and immediately a rooster crowed.
28 Then they led Jesus from Caʹia·phas to the governor’s residence. It was now early in the morning. But they themselves did not enter into the governor’s residence, so that they would not get defiled but could eat the Passover.
29 So Pilate came outside to them and said: “What accusation do you bring against this man?”
30 They answered him: “If this man were not a wrongdoer, we would not have handed him over to you.”
31 So Pilate said to them: “Take him yourselves and judge him according to your law.” The Jews said to him: “It is not lawful for us to kill anyone.”
32 This was to fulfill the word that Jesus had spoken to indicate what sort of death he was about to die.
33 So Pilate entered the governor’s residence again and called Jesus and said to him: “Are you the King of the Jews?”
34 Jesus answered: “Are you asking this of your own originality, or did others tell you about me?”
35 Pilate replied: “I am not a Jew, am I? Your own nation and the chief priests handed you over to me. What did you do?”
36 Jesus answered: “My Kingdom is no part of this world. If my Kingdom were part of this world, my attendants would have fought that I should not be handed over to the Jews. But as it is, my Kingdom is not from this source.”
37 So Pilate said to him: “Well, then, are you a king?” Jesus answered: “You yourself are saying that I am a king. For this I have been born, and for this I have come into the world, that I should bear witness to the truth. Everyone who is on the side of the truth listens to my voice.”
38 Pilate said to him: “What is truth?” After saying this, he went out again to the Jews and said to them: “I find no fault in him.
39 Moreover, you have a custom that I should release a man to you at the Passover. So do you want me to release to you the King of the Jews?”
40 Again they shouted: “Not this man, but Bar·abʹbas!” Now Bar·abʹbas was a robber.
20 On the first day of the week, Mary Magʹda·lene came to the tomb early, while it was still dark, and she saw that the stone had already been taken away from the tomb.
2 So she came running to Simon Peter and to the other disciple, for whom Jesus had affection, and she said to them: “They have taken away the Lord out of the tomb, and we do not know where they have laid him.”
3 Then Peter and the other disciple set out for the tomb.
4 The two of them began running together, but the other disciple ran faster than Peter and reached the tomb first.
5 Stooping forward, he saw the linen cloths lying there, but he did not go in.
6 Then Simon Peter also came, following him, and he went into the tomb. And he saw the linen cloths lying there.
7 The cloth that had been on his head was not lying with the other cloth bands but was rolled up in a place by itself.
8 Then the other disciple who had reached the tomb first also went in, and he saw and believed.
9 For they did not yet understand the scripture that he must rise from the dead.
10 So the disciples went back to their homes.
11 Mary, however, kept standing outside near the tomb, weeping. While she was weeping, she stooped forward to look into the tomb,
12 and she saw two angels in white sitting where the body of Jesus had been lying, one at the head and one at the feet.
13 And they said to her: “Woman, why are you weeping?” She said to them: “They have taken my Lord away, and I do not know where they have laid him.”
14 After saying this, she turned around and saw Jesus standing there, but she did not realize that it was Jesus.
15 Jesus said to her: “Woman, why are you weeping? Whom are you looking for?” She, thinking it was the gardener, said to him: “Sir, if you have carried him off, tell me where you have laid him, and I will take him away.”
16 Jesus said to her: “Mary!” On turning around, she said to him in Hebrew: “Rab·boʹni!” (which means “Teacher!”)
17 Jesus said to her: “Stop clinging to me, for I have not yet ascended to the Father. But go to my brothers and say to them, ‘I am ascending to my Father and your Father and to my God and your God.’”
18 Mary Magʹda·lene came and brought the news to the disciples: “I have seen the Lord!” And she told them what he had said to her.
19 When it was late that day, the first day of the week, and the doors were locked where the disciples were for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in their midst and said to them: “May you have peace.”
20 After saying this, he showed them his hands and his side. Then the disciples rejoiced at seeing the Lord.
21 Jesus said to them again: “May you have peace. Just as the Father has sent me, I also am sending you.”
22 After saying this he blew on them and said to them: “Receive holy spirit.
23 If you forgive the sins of anyone, they are forgiven; if you retain those of anyone, they are retained.”
24 But Thomas, one of the Twelve, who was called the Twin, was not with them when Jesus came.
25 So the other disciples were telling him: “We have seen the Lord!” But he said to them: “Unless I see in his hands the print of the nails and stick my finger into the print of the nails and stick my hand into his side, I will never believe it.”
26 Well, eight days later his disciples were again indoors, and Thomas was with them. Jesus came, although the doors were locked, and he stood in their midst and said: “May you have peace.”
27 Next he said to Thomas: “Put your finger here, and see my hands, and take your hand and stick it into my side, and stop doubting but believe.”
28 In answer Thomas said to him: “My Lord and my God!”
29 Jesus said to him: “Because you have seen me, have you believed? Happy are those who have not seen and yet believe.”
30 To be sure, Jesus also performed many other signs before the disciples, which are not written down in this scroll.
31 But these have been written down so that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and because of believing, you may have life by means of his name.
2 Now while the day of the Festival of Pentecost was in progress, they were all together at the same place.
2 Suddenly there was a noise from heaven, just like that of a rushing, stiff breeze, and it filled the whole house where they were sitting.
3 And tongues as if of fire became visible to them and were distributed, and one came to rest on each one of them,
4 and they all became filled with holy spirit and started to speak in different languages, just as the spirit enabled them to speak.
5 At that time devout Jews from every nation under heaven were staying in Jerusalem.
6 So when this sound occurred, a crowd gathered and was bewildered, because each one heard them speaking in his own language.
7 Indeed, they were utterly amazed and said: “See here, all these who are speaking are Gal·i·leʹans, are they not?
8 How is it, then, that each one of us is hearing his own native language?
9 Parʹthi·ans, Medes, and Eʹlam·ites, the inhabitants of Mes·o·po·taʹmi·a, Ju·deʹa and Cap·pa·doʹci·a, Ponʹtus and the province of Asia,
10 Phrygʹi·a and Pam·phylʹi·a, Egypt and the regions of Libʹy·a near Cy·reʹne, sojourners from Rome, both Jews and proselytes,
11 Creʹtans, and Arabians—we hear them speaking in our languages about the magnificent things of God.”
12 Yes, they were all astonished and perplexed, saying to one another: “What does this mean?”
13 However, others mocked them and said: “They are full of sweet wine.”
14 But Peter stood up with the Eleven and spoke to them in a loud voice: “Men of Ju·deʹa and all you inhabitants of Jerusalem, let this be known to you and listen carefully to my words.
15 These people are, in fact, not drunk, as you suppose, for it is the third hour of the day.
16 On the contrary, this is what was said through the prophet Joel:
17 ‘“And in the last days,” God says, “I will pour out some of my spirit on every sort of flesh, and your sons and your daughters will prophesy and your young men will see visions and your old men will dream dreams,
18 and even on my male slaves and on my female slaves I will pour out some of my spirit in those days, and they will prophesy.
19 And I will give wonders in heaven above and signs on earth below—blood and fire and clouds of smoke.
20 The sun will be turned into darkness and the moon into blood before the great and illustrious day of Jehovah comes.
21 And everyone who calls on the name of Jehovah will be saved.”’
22 “Men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ was a man publicly shown to you by God through powerful works and wonders and signs that God did through him in your midst, just as you yourselves know.
23 This man, who was handed over by the determined will and foreknowledge of God, you fastened to a stake by the hand of lawless men, and you did away with him.
24 But God resurrected him by releasing him from the pangs of death, because it was not possible for him to be held fast by it.
25 For David says about him: ‘I keep Jehovah constantly in front of me, for he is at my right hand that I may never be shaken.
26 On this account my heart became cheerful and my tongue rejoiced greatly. And I will reside in hope;
27 because you will not leave me in the Grave, nor will you allow your loyal one to see corruption.
28 You have made life’s ways known to me; you will fill me with great joy in your presence.’
29 “Men, brothers, it is permissible to speak with freeness of speech to you about the family head David, that he died and was buried, and his tomb is with us to this day.
30 Because he was a prophet and knew that God had sworn to him with an oath that he would seat one of his offspring on his throne,
31 he foresaw and spoke about the resurrection of the Christ, that neither was he forsaken in the Grave nor did his flesh see corruption.
32 God resurrected this Jesus, and of this we are all witnesses.
33 Therefore, because he was exalted to the right hand of God and received the promised holy spirit from the Father, he has poured out what you see and hear.
34 For David did not ascend to the heavens, but he himself says, ‘Jehovah said to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand
35 until I place your enemies as a stool for your feet.”’
36 Therefore, let all the house of Israel know for a certainty that God made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus whom you executed on a stake.”
37 Now when they heard this, they were stabbed to the heart, and they said to Peter and the rest of the apostles: “Men, brothers, what should we do?”
38 Peter said to them: “Repent, and let each one of you be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for forgiveness of your sins, and you will receive the free gift of the holy spirit.
39 For the promise is to you and your children, and to all those who are far away, to all those whom Jehovah our God may call to himself.”
40 And with many other words he gave a thorough witness and kept exhorting them, saying: “Get saved from this crooked generation.”
41 So those who gladly accepted his word were baptized, and on that day about 3,000 people were added.
42 And they continued devoting themselves to the teaching of the apostles, to associating together, to the taking of meals, and to prayers.
43 Indeed, fear began to fall upon everyone, and many wonders and signs began to occur through the apostles.
44 All those who became believers were together and had everything in common,
45 and they were selling their possessions and properties and distributing the proceeds to all, according to what each one needed.
46 And day after day they were in constant attendance in the temple with a united purpose, and they took their meals in different homes and shared their food with great rejoicing and sincerity of heart,
47 praising God and finding favor with all the people. At the same time Jehovah continued to add to them daily those being saved.
3 Now Peter and John were going up into the temple for the hour of prayer, the ninth hour,
2 and a man who was lame from birth was being carried. Every day they would put him near the temple door that was called Beautiful, so he could ask for gifts of mercy from those entering the temple.
3 When he caught sight of Peter and John about to go into the temple, he began asking for gifts of mercy.
4 But Peter, together with John, looked straight at him and said: “Look at us.”
5 So he fixed his attention on them, expecting to get something from them.
6 However, Peter said: “Silver and gold I do not possess, but what I do have is what I give you. In the name of Jesus Christ the Naz·a·reneʹ, walk!”
7 With that he took hold of him by the right hand and raised him up. Instantly his feet and his ankles were made firm;
8 and leaping to his feet, he began walking and went with them into the temple, walking and leaping and praising God.
9 And all the people saw him walking and praising God.
10 And they began to recognize him, that this was the man who used to sit waiting for gifts of mercy at the Beautiful Gate of the temple, and they were completely astonished and ecstatic about what had happened to him.
11 While the man was still holding on to Peter and John, all the people ran together to them at what was called Solʹo·mon’s Colonnade, completely surprised.
12 When Peter saw this, he said to the people: “Men of Israel, why are you so amazed at this, and why are you staring at us as though by personal power or godly devotion we have made him walk?
13 The God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob, the God of our forefathers, has glorified his Servant, Jesus, whom you handed over and disowned before Pilate, even though he had decided to release him.
14 Yes, you disowned that holy and righteous one, and you asked for a man who was a murderer to be given to you,
15 whereas you killed the Chief Agent of life. But God raised him up from the dead, of which fact we are witnesses.
16 And through his name, and by our faith in his name, this man whom you see and know has been made strong. The faith that is through him has made this man completely healthy in front of all of you.
17 And now, brothers, I know that you acted in ignorance, just as your rulers also did.
18 But in this way God has fulfilled the things he announced beforehand through the mouth of all the prophets, that his Christ would suffer.
19 “Repent, therefore, and turn around so as to get your sins blotted out, so that seasons of refreshing may come from Jehovah himself
20 and he may send the Christ appointed for you, Jesus.
21 Heaven must hold this one within itself until the times of restoration of all things of which God spoke through the mouth of his holy prophets of old.
22 In fact, Moses said: ‘Jehovah your God will raise up for you from among your brothers a prophet like me. You must listen to whatever he tells you.
23 Indeed, anyone who does not listen to that Prophet will be completely destroyed from among the people.’
24 And all the prophets from Samuel and those who followed him, as many as have spoken, have also plainly declared these days.
25 You are the sons of the prophets and of the covenant that God made with your forefathers, saying to Abraham: ‘And by means of your offspring all the families of the earth will be blessed.’
26 God, after raising up his Servant, sent him to you first to bless you by turning each one of you away from your wicked deeds.”
6 Now in those days when the disciples were increasing, the Greek-speaking Jews began complaining against the Hebrew-speaking Jews, because their widows were being overlooked in the daily distribution.
2 So the Twelve called the multitude of the disciples together and said: “It is not right for us to leave the word of God to distribute food to tables.
3 So, brothers, select for yourselves seven reputable men from among you, full of spirit and wisdom, that we may appoint them over this necessary matter;
4 but we will devote ourselves to prayer and to the ministry of the word.”
5 What they said was pleasing to the whole multitude, and they selected Stephen, a man full of faith and holy spirit, as well as Philip, Prochʹo·rus, Ni·caʹnor, Tiʹmon, Parʹme·nas, and Nic·o·laʹus, a proselyte of Antioch.
6 They brought them to the apostles, and after praying, they laid their hands on them.
7 Consequently, the word of God continued to spread, and the number of the disciples kept multiplying very much in Jerusalem; and a large crowd of priests began to be obedient to the faith.
8 Now Stephen, full of divine favor and power, was performing great wonders and signs among the people.
9 But some men of the so-called Synagogue of the Freedmen came forward, along with some Cy·reʹni·ans and Alexandrians, and some from Ci·liʹcia and Asia, to dispute with Stephen.
10 But they could not hold their own against the wisdom and the spirit with which he was speaking.
11 Then they secretly persuaded men to say: “We have heard him speaking blasphemous things against Moses and God.”
12 And they stirred up the people, the elders, and the scribes, and coming upon him suddenly, they forcibly seized him and led him to the Sanʹhe·drin.
13 And they brought forward false witnesses, who said: “This man does not stop speaking things against this holy place and against the Law.
14 For instance, we have heard him say that this Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ will throw down this place and change the customs that Moses handed down to us.”
15 And as all those sitting in the Sanʹhe·drin stared at him, they saw that his face was like an angel’s face.
8 Saul, for his part, approved of his murder. On that day great persecution arose against the congregation that was in Jerusalem; all except the apostles were scattered throughout the regions of Ju·deʹa and Sa·marʹi·a.
2 But devout men carried Stephen away to bury him, and they made a great mourning over him.
3 Saul, though, began to ravage the congregation. He would invade one house after another, dragging out both men and women and turning them over to prison.
4 However, those who had been scattered went through the land declaring the good news of the word.
5 Now Philip went down to the city of Sa·marʹi·a and began to preach the Christ to them.
6 The crowds with one accord were paying attention to what Philip said while they listened and observed the signs he was performing.
7 For many had unclean spirits, and these would cry out with a loud voice and come out. Moreover, many who were paralyzed and lame were cured.
8 So there came to be a great deal of joy in that city.
9 Now in the city was a man named Simon, who prior to this had been practicing magical arts and amazing the nation of Sa·marʹi·a, claiming that he was somebody great.
10 All of them, from the least to the greatest, would pay attention to him and say: “This man is the Power of God, which is called Great.”
11 So they would pay attention to him because he had amazed them for quite a while by his magical arts.
12 But when they believed Philip, who was declaring the good news of the Kingdom of God and of the name of Jesus Christ, both men and women were getting baptized.
13 Simon himself also became a believer, and after being baptized, he continued with Philip; and he was amazed at seeing the signs and great powerful works taking place.
14 When the apostles in Jerusalem heard that Sa·marʹi·a had accepted the word of God, they sent Peter and John to them;
15 and these went down and prayed for them to get holy spirit.
16 For it had not yet come upon any one of them, but they had only been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
17 Then they laid their hands on them, and they began to receive holy spirit.
18 Now when Simon saw that the spirit was given through the laying on of the hands of the apostles, he offered them money,
19 saying: “Give me this authority also, so that anyone on whom I lay my hands may receive holy spirit.”
20 But Peter said to him: “May your silver perish with you, because you thought you could acquire the free gift of God with money.
21 You have neither part nor share in this matter, for your heart is not straight in the sight of God.
22 So repent of this badness of yours, and supplicate Jehovah that, if possible, the wicked intention of your heart may be forgiven you;
23 for I see you are a bitter poison and a slave of unrighteousness.”
24 In answer Simon said to them: “Make supplication for me to Jehovah that none of the things you have said may come upon me.”
25 Therefore, when they had given the witness thoroughly and had spoken the word of Jehovah, they started back toward Jerusalem, and they went declaring the good news to many villages of the Sa·marʹi·tans.
26 However, Jehovah’s angel spoke to Philip, saying: “Get up and go to the south to the road that runs down from Jerusalem to Gazʹa.” (This is a desert road.)
27 With that he got up and went, and look! an E·thi·oʹpi·an eunuch, a man who had authority under Can·daʹce, queen of the E·thi·oʹpi·ans, and who was in charge of all her treasure. He had gone to Jerusalem to worship,
28 and he was returning and was sitting in his chariot, reading aloud the prophet Isaiah.
29 So the spirit said to Philip: “Go over and approach this chariot.”
30 Philip ran alongside and heard him reading aloud Isaiah the prophet, and he said: “Do you actually know what you are reading?”
31 He said: “Really, how could I ever do so unless someone guided me?” So he urged Philip to get on and sit down with him.
32 Now this was the passage of Scripture that he was reading: “Like a sheep he was brought to the slaughter, and like a lamb that is silent before its shearer, so he does not open his mouth.
33 During his humiliation, justice was taken away from him. Who will tell the details of his generation? Because his life is taken away from the earth.”
34 The eunuch then said to Philip: “I beg you, about whom does the prophet say this? About himself or about some other man?”
35 Philip began to speak, and starting with this scripture, he declared to him the good news about Jesus.
36 Now as they were going along the road, they came to a body of water, and the eunuch said: “Look! Here is water; what prevents me from getting baptized?”
38 With that he commanded the chariot to halt, and both Philip and the eunuch went down into the water, and he baptized him.
39 When they came up out of the water, Jehovah’s spirit quickly led Philip away, and the eunuch did not see him anymore, but he went on his way rejoicing.
40 Philip, however, found himself in Ashʹdod, and he went through the territory and kept on declaring the good news to all the cities until he got to Caes·a·reʹa.
9 But Saul, still breathing threat and murder against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest
2 and asked him for letters to the synagogues in Damascus, so that he might bring bound to Jerusalem any whom he found who belonged to The Way, both men and women.
3 Now as he was traveling and getting near Damascus, suddenly a light from heaven flashed around him,
4 and he fell to the ground and heard a voice say to him: “Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?”
5 He asked: “Who are you, Lord?” He said: “I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting.
6 But get up and go into the city, and you will be told what you must do.”
7 Now the men who were traveling with him stood speechless, hearing, indeed, the sound of a voice but seeing no one.
8 Saul then got up from the ground, and though his eyes were open, he could see nothing. So they led him by the hand and brought him into Damascus.
9 And for three days he did not see anything, and he neither ate nor drank.
10 There was a disciple named An·a·niʹas in Damascus, and the Lord said to him in a vision: “An·a·niʹas!” He said: “Here I am, Lord.”
11 The Lord said to him: “Get up, go to the street called Straight, and look for a man named Saul, from Tarsus, at the house of Judas. For look! he is praying,
12 and in a vision he has seen a man named An·a·niʹas come in and lay his hands on him so that he may recover sight.”
13 But An·a·niʹas answered: “Lord, I have heard from many about this man, about all the harm he did to your holy ones in Jerusalem.
14 And here he has authority from the chief priests to arrest all those calling on your name.”
15 But the Lord said to him: “Go! because this man is a chosen vessel to me to bear my name to the nations as well as to kings and the sons of Israel.
16 For I will show him plainly how many things he must suffer for my name.”
17 So An·a·niʹas went and entered the house, and he laid his hands on him and said: “Saul, brother, the Lord Jesus, who appeared to you on the road along which you were coming, has sent me so that you may recover sight and be filled with holy spirit.”
18 And immediately, what looked like scales fell from his eyes, and he recovered his sight. He then got up and was baptized,
19 and he ate some food and gained strength. He stayed for some days with the disciples in Damascus,
20 and immediately in the synagogues he began to preach about Jesus, that this one is the Son of God.
21 But all those hearing him were astonished and were saying: “Is this not the man who ravaged those in Jerusalem who call on this name? Did he not come here for the purpose of arresting them and taking them to the chief priests?”
22 But Saul kept on acquiring more and more power and was confounding the Jews who lived in Damascus, as he proved logically that this is the Christ.
23 Now when many days had passed, the Jews plotted together to do away with him.
24 However, their plot against Saul became known to him. They were also watching the gates closely both day and night in order to do away with him.
25 So his disciples took him and let him down by night through an opening in the wall, lowering him in a basket.
26 On arriving in Jerusalem, he made efforts to join the disciples, but they were all afraid of him, because they did not believe he was a disciple.
27 So Barʹna·bas came to his aid and led him to the apostles, and he told them in detail how on the road he had seen the Lord, and that he had spoken to him, and how in Damascus he had spoken boldly in the name of Jesus.
28 So he remained with them, moving about freely in Jerusalem, speaking boldly in the name of the Lord.
29 He was talking and disputing with the Greek-speaking Jews, but these made attempts to do away with him.
30 When the brothers found out about this, they brought him down to Caes·a·reʹa and sent him off to Tarsus.
31 Then, indeed, the congregation throughout the whole of Ju·deʹa and Galʹi·lee and Sa·marʹi·a entered into a period of peace, being built up; and as it walked in the fear of Jehovah and in the comfort of the holy spirit, it kept on multiplying.
32 Now as Peter was traveling through all the region, he came down also to the holy ones who lived in Lydʹda.
33 There he found a man named Ae·neʹas, who had been lying flat on his bed for eight years, for he was paralyzed.
34 Peter said to him: “Ae·neʹas, Jesus Christ heals you. Rise and make up your bed.” And he got up immediately.
35 When all those living in Lydʹda and the Plain of Sharʹon saw him, they turned to the Lord.
36 Now there was in Jopʹpa a disciple named Tabʹi·tha, which means, when translated, “Dorʹcas.” She abounded in good deeds and gifts of mercy that she was making.
37 But in those days she fell sick and died. So they bathed her and laid her in an upper room.
38 Since Lydʹda was near Jopʹpa, when the disciples heard that Peter was in that city, they sent two men to him to urge him: “Please come to us without delay.”
39 At that Peter got up and went with them. And when he arrived, they led him up into the upper room; and all the widows presented themselves to him, weeping and showing many garments and robes that Dorʹcas had made while she was with them.
40 Peter then put everyone outside, and kneeling down, he prayed. Then turning toward the body, he said: “Tabʹi·tha, rise!” She opened her eyes, and as she caught sight of Peter, she sat up.
41 Giving her his hand, he raised her up, and he called the holy ones and the widows and presented her alive.
42 This became known throughout all Jopʹpa, and many became believers in the Lord.
43 He remained for quite a few days in Jopʹpa with a tanner named Simon.
10 Now there was a man in Caes·a·reʹa named Cornelius, an army officer in what was called the Italian unit.
2 He was a devout man who feared God together with all his household, and he made many gifts of mercy to the people and made supplication to God continually.
3 About the ninth hour of the day, he saw plainly in a vision an angel of God come in to him and say: “Cornelius!”
4 Cornelius stared at him, terrified, and asked: “What is it, Lord?” He said to him: “Your prayers and gifts of mercy have ascended as a remembrance before God.
5 So now send men to Jopʹpa and summon a man named Simon who is called Peter.
6 This man is staying as a guest with Simon, a tanner who has a house by the sea.”
7 As soon as the angel who spoke to him left, he called two of his servants and a devout soldier from among those who were his attendants,
8 and he related everything to them and sent them to Jopʹpa.
9 The next day as they were continuing on their journey and were approaching the city, Peter went up to the housetop about the sixth hour to pray.
10 But he became very hungry and wanted to eat. While they were preparing the meal, he fell into a trance
11 and saw heaven opened and something descending like a great linen sheet being let down by its four corners on the earth;
12 and in it were all sorts of four-footed animals and reptiles of the earth and birds of heaven.
13 Then a voice said to him: “Get up, Peter, slaughter and eat!”
14 But Peter said: “Not at all, Lord, because I have never eaten anything defiled and unclean.”
15 And the voice spoke again to him, the second time: “Stop calling defiled the things God has cleansed.”
16 This happened a third time, and immediately it was taken up into heaven.
17 While Peter was still perplexed about what the vision he had seen could mean, just then the men sent by Cornelius asked where Simon’s house was and stood there at the gate.
18 They called out and inquired whether Simon who was called Peter was a guest there.
19 As Peter was still pondering over the vision, the spirit said: “Look! Three men are asking for you.
20 So get up, go downstairs and go with them, not doubting at all, because I have sent them.”
21 Then Peter went downstairs to the men and said: “Here I am, the one you are looking for. Why are you here?”
22 They said: “Cornelius, an army officer, a righteous and God-fearing man who is well-reported-on by the whole nation of the Jews, was given divine instructions by a holy angel to send for you to come to his house and to hear what you have to say.”
23 So he invited them in and had them stay as his guests. The next day he got up and went off with them, and some of the brothers from Jopʹpa went with him.
24 The following day he entered into Caes·a·reʹa. Cornelius, of course, was expecting them and had called together his relatives and close friends.
25 As Peter entered, Cornelius met him, fell down at his feet, and did obeisance to him.
26 But Peter lifted him up, saying: “Rise; I too am just a man.”
27 As he conversed with him, he went in and found many people assembled.
28 He said to them: “You well know how unlawful it is for a Jew to associate with or approach a man of another race, and yet God has shown me that I should call no man defiled or unclean.
29 So I came, really without objection, when I was sent for. Therefore, I ask you why you sent for me.”
30 Then Cornelius said: “Four days ago counting from this hour, I was praying in my house at the ninth hour; just then a man in bright clothing stood in front of me
31 and said: ‘Cornelius, your prayer has been favorably heard, and your gifts of mercy have been remembered before God.
32 Therefore, send to Jopʹpa and call for Simon who is called Peter. This man is a guest in the house of Simon, a tanner, by the sea.’
33 I then sent for you at once, and you were kind enough to come here. So now we are all present before God to hear all the things you have been commanded by Jehovah to say.”
34 At this Peter began to speak, and he said: “Now I truly understand that God is not partial,
35 but in every nation the man who fears him and does what is right is acceptable to him.
36 He sent out the word to the sons of Israel to declare to them the good news of peace through Jesus Christ—this one is Lord of all.
37 You know the subject that was talked about throughout all Ju·deʹa, starting from Galʹi·lee after the baptism that John preached:
38 about Jesus who was from Nazʹa·reth, how God anointed him with holy spirit and power, and he went through the land doing good and healing all those oppressed by the Devil, because God was with him.
39 And we are witnesses of all the things he did both in the country of the Jews and in Jerusalem; but they did away with him by hanging him on a stake.
40 God raised this one up on the third day and allowed him to become manifest,
41 not to all the people, but to witnesses appointed beforehand by God, to us, who ate and drank with him after his rising from the dead.
42 Also, he ordered us to preach to the people and to give a thorough witness that this is the one decreed by God to be judge of the living and the dead.
43 To him all the prophets bear witness, that everyone putting faith in him receives forgiveness of sins through his name.”
44 While Peter was still speaking about these matters, the holy spirit came upon all those hearing the word.
45 And the circumcised believers who had come with Peter were amazed, because the free gift of the holy spirit was being poured out also on people of the nations.
46 For they heard them speaking in foreign languages and magnifying God. Then Peter responded:
47 “Can anyone deny water to prevent these from being baptized who have received the holy spirit just as we have?”
48 With that he commanded them to be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. Then they requested him to stay for some days.
11 Now the apostles and the brothers who were in Ju·deʹa heard that people of the nations had also accepted the word of God.
2 So when Peter came up to Jerusalem, the supporters of circumcision began to criticize him,
3 saying: “You went into the house of men who were not circumcised and ate with them.”
4 At this Peter went on to explain the matter in detail to them, saying:
5 “I was in the city of Jopʹpa praying, and while in a trance I saw a vision, something descending like a great linen sheet being let down by its four corners from heaven, and it came right down to me.
6 Looking closely into it, I observed four-footed animals of the earth, wild beasts, reptiles, and birds of heaven.
7 I also heard a voice say to me: ‘Get up, Peter, slaughter and eat!’
8 But I said: ‘Certainly not, Lord, because a defiled or unclean thing has never entered my mouth.’
9 The second time, the voice from heaven answered: ‘You stop calling defiled the things God has cleansed.’
10 This happened a third time, and everything was pulled up again into heaven.
11 Also just at that moment, three men were standing at the house where we were staying, having been sent to me from Caes·a·reʹa.
12 Then the spirit told me to go with them, not doubting at all. But these six brothers also went with me, and we entered into the house of the man.
13 “He reported to us how he saw the angel stand in his house and say: ‘Send men to Jopʹpa and summon Simon who is called Peter,
14 and he will tell you things by which you and all your household may get saved.’
15 But when I started to speak, the holy spirit fell on them just as it did also on us in the beginning.
16 At this I recalled the saying of the Lord, how he used to say: ‘John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with holy spirit.’
17 If, therefore, God gave the same free gift to them that he gave to us who have believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I that I should be able to hinder God?”
18 When they heard these things, they stopped objecting, and they glorified God, saying: “So, then, God has also granted to people of the nations repentance leading to life.”
19 Now those who had been scattered by the tribulation that arose over Stephen went as far as Phoe·niʹcia, Cyʹprus, and Antioch, but they spoke the word only to the Jews.
20 However, some of the men among them from Cyʹprus and Cy·reʹne came to Antioch and began talking to the Greek-speaking people, declaring the good news of the Lord Jesus.
21 Furthermore, the hand of Jehovah was with them, and a great number became believers and turned to the Lord.
22 The report about them reached the ears of the congregation in Jerusalem, and they sent out Barʹna·bas as far as Antioch.
23 When he arrived and saw the undeserved kindness of God, he rejoiced and began to encourage them all to continue in the Lord with heartfelt resolve;
24 for he was a good man and full of holy spirit and faith. And a considerable crowd was added to the Lord.
25 So he went to Tarsus to make a thorough search for Saul.
26 After he found him, he brought him to Antioch. So for a whole year they assembled with them in the congregation and taught quite a crowd, and it was first in Antioch that the disciples were by divine providence called Christians.
27 In those days prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch.
28 One of them named Agʹa·bus stood up and foretold through the spirit that a great famine was about to come on the entire inhabited earth, which, in fact, did take place in the time of Claudius.
29 So the disciples determined, each according to what he could afford, to send relief to the brothers living in Ju·deʹa;
30 and this they did, sending it to the elders by the hand of Barʹna·bas and Saul.
12 About that time Herod the king began mistreating some of those of the congregation.
2 He put James the brother of John to death by the sword.
3 When he saw that it was pleasing to the Jews, he also went on to arrest Peter. (This was during the days of the Unleavened Bread.)
4 He seized him and put him in prison, turning him over to four shifts of four soldiers each to guard him, intending to bring him out before the people after the Passover.
5 So Peter was being kept in the prison, but the congregation was intensely praying to God for him.
6 When Herod was about to bring him out, that night Peter was sleeping bound with two chains between two soldiers, and guards in front of the door were keeping watch over the prison.
7 But look! Jehovah’s angel was standing there, and a light shone in the prison cell. Hitting Peter on the side, he woke him, saying: “Get up quickly!” And the chains fell off his hands.
8 The angel said to him: “Get dressed and put on your sandals.” He did so. Finally he said to him: “Put your outer garment on, and keep following me.”
9 And he went out and kept following him, but he did not know that what was happening through the angel was real. In fact, he thought he was seeing a vision.
10 Going past the first sentinel guard and the second, they reached the iron gate leading into the city, and this opened to them by itself. After they went out, they made their way down one street, and immediately the angel departed from him.
11 And Peter, realizing what was happening, said: “Now I know for sure that Jehovah sent his angel and rescued me from Herod’s hand and from everything that the Jews were expecting to happen.”
12 After he realized this, he went to the house of Mary the mother of John who was called Mark, where quite a few were gathered together and were praying.
13 When he knocked at the door of the gateway, a servant girl named Rhoda came to answer the call.
14 On recognizing the voice of Peter, she was so overjoyed that she did not open the gate, but ran inside and reported that Peter was standing at the gateway.
15 They said to her: “You are out of your mind.” But she kept insisting that it was so. They began to say: “It is his angel.”
16 But Peter remained there, knocking. When they opened the door, they saw him and were astonished.
17 But he motioned to them with his hand to be silent and told them in detail how Jehovah had brought him out of the prison, and he said: “Report these things to James and the brothers.” With that he went out and traveled to another place.
18 Now when it became day, there was quite a disturbance among the soldiers over what had become of Peter.
19 Herod made a diligent search for him, and not finding him, he interrogated the guards and commanded them to be led off to punishment; and he went down from Ju·deʹa to Caes·a·reʹa and spent some time there.
20 Now he was in an angry mood against the people of Tyre and Siʹdon. So they came to him with one purpose, and after persuading Blastus, the man in charge of the king’s household affairs, they sued for peace, because their country was supplied with food from the land of the king.
21 On a set day, Herod clothed himself with royal raiment and sat down on the judgment seat and began giving them a public address.
22 Then the people who were assembled began shouting: “A god’s voice, and not a man’s!”
23 Instantly the angel of Jehovah struck him, because he did not give the glory to God, and he was eaten up with worms and died.
24 But the word of Jehovah went on growing and spreading.
25 As for Barʹna·bas and Saul, after fully carrying out the relief work in Jerusalem, they returned and took along with them John, the one also called Mark.
14 Now in I·coʹni·um they entered together into the synagogue of the Jews and spoke in such a manner that a great multitude of both Jews and Greeks became believers.
2 But the Jews who did not believe stirred up and wrongly influenced the people of the nations against the brothers.
3 So they spent considerable time speaking with boldness by the authority of Jehovah, who bore witness to the word of his undeserved kindness by allowing signs and wonders to be performed through them.
4 However, the multitude of the city was divided; some were for the Jews but others for the apostles.
5 When both the people of the nations and the Jews with their rulers made an attempt to treat them insolently and stone them,
6 they were informed of it, and they fled to the cities of Lyc·a·oʹni·a, Lysʹtra and Derʹbe, and to the surrounding country.
7 There they went on declaring the good news.
8 Now in Lysʹtra there was a man sitting down whose feet were crippled. He was lame from birth and had never walked.
9 This man was listening to Paul as he was speaking. Paul, looking intently at him and seeing that he had faith to be made well,
10 said with a loud voice: “Stand up on your feet.” So the man leaped up and began walking.
11 When the crowds saw what Paul had done, they cried out in the Lyc·a·oʹni·an language: “The gods have become like humans and have come down to us!”
12 And they started calling Barʹna·bas Zeus, but Paul Herʹmes, since he was taking the lead in speaking.
13 And the priest of Zeus, whose temple was at the entrance of the city, brought bulls and garlands to the gates and wanted to offer sacrifices with the crowds.
14 However, when the apostles Barʹna·bas and Paul heard of it, they ripped their garments and leaped out into the crowd and cried out:
15 “Men, why are you doing these things? We too are humans having the same infirmities as you have. And we are declaring the good news to you, for you to turn from these vain things to the living God, who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all the things in them.
16 In past generations he permitted all the nations to go on in their ways,
17 although he did not leave himself without witness in that he did good, giving you rains from heaven and fruitful seasons, satisfying you with food and filling your hearts with gladness.”
18 And yet despite saying these things, they barely restrained the crowds from sacrificing to them.
19 But Jews arrived from Antioch and I·coʹni·um and persuaded the crowds, and they stoned Paul and dragged him outside the city, imagining that he was dead.
20 However, when the disciples surrounded him, he got up and entered the city. On the next day he left with Barʹna·bas for Derʹbe.
21 After declaring the good news to that city and making quite a few disciples, they returned to Lysʹtra, I·coʹni·um, and Antioch.
22 There they strengthened the disciples, encouraging them to remain in the faith and saying: “We must enter into the Kingdom of God through many tribulations.”
23 Moreover, they appointed elders for them in each congregation, offering prayer with fasting, and they entrusted them to Jehovah, in whom they had become believers.
24 Then they went through Pi·sidʹi·a and came into Pam·phylʹi·a,
25 and after proclaiming the word in Perga, they went down to At·ta·liʹa.
26 From there they sailed off for Antioch, where they had been entrusted to the undeserved kindness of God for the work they had now completed.
27 When they had arrived and had gathered the congregation together, they related the many things God had done by means of them, and that he had opened to the nations the door to faith.
28 So they spent considerable time with the disciples.
15 Now some men came down from Ju·deʹa and began to teach the brothers: “Unless you get circumcised according to the custom of Moses, you cannot be saved.”
2 But after quite a bit of dissension and disputing by Paul and Barʹna·bas with them, it was arranged for Paul, Barʹna·bas, and some of the others to go up to the apostles and elders in Jerusalem regarding this issue.
3 So after being escorted partway by the congregation, these men continued on through both Phoe·niʹcia and Sa·marʹi·a, relating in detail the conversion of people of the nations and bringing great joy to all the brothers.
4 On arriving in Jerusalem, they were kindly received by the congregation and the apostles and the elders, and they related the many things God had done by means of them.
5 But some of those of the sect of the Pharisees who had become believers stood up from their seats and said: “It is necessary to circumcise them and command them to observe the Law of Moses.”
6 So the apostles and the elders gathered together to look into this matter.
7 After much intense discussion had taken place, Peter rose and said to them: “Men, brothers, you well know that from early days God made the choice among you that through my mouth people of the nations should hear the word of the good news and believe.
8 And God, who knows the heart, bore witness by giving them the holy spirit, just as he did to us also.
9 And he made no distinction at all between us and them, but purified their hearts by faith.
10 So why are you now making a test of God by imposing on the neck of the disciples a yoke that neither our forefathers nor we were capable of bearing?
11 On the contrary, we have faith that we are saved through the undeserved kindness of the Lord Jesus in the same way that they are.”
12 At that the entire group became silent, and they began to listen to Barʹna·bas and Paul relate the many signs and wonders that God had done through them among the nations.
13 After they finished speaking, James replied: “Men, brothers, hear me.
14 Symʹe·on has related thoroughly how God for the first time turned his attention to the nations to take out of them a people for his name.
15 And with this the words of the Prophets agree, just as it is written:
16 ‘After these things I will return and raise up again the tent of David that is fallen down; I will rebuild its ruins and restore it,
17 so that the men who remain may earnestly seek Jehovah, together with people of all the nations, people who are called by my name, says Jehovah, who is doing these things,
18 known from of old.’
19 Therefore, my decision is not to trouble those from the nations who are turning to God,
20 but to write them to abstain from things polluted by idols, from sexual immorality, from what is strangled, and from blood.
21 For from ancient times Moses has had those who preach him in city after city, because he is read aloud in the synagogues on every sabbath.”
22 Then the apostles and the elders, together with the whole congregation, decided to send chosen men from among them to Antioch, along with Paul and Barʹna·bas; they sent Judas who was called Barʹsab·bas and Silas, who were leading men among the brothers.
23 They wrote this and sent it through them: “The apostles and the elders, your brothers, to those brothers in Antioch, Syria, and Ci·liʹcia who are from the nations: Greetings!
24 Since we have heard that some went out from among us and caused you trouble with what they have said, trying to subvert you, although we did not give them any instructions,
25 we have come to a unanimous decision to choose men to send to you together with our beloved Barʹna·bas and Paul,
26 men who have given up their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
27 We are therefore sending Judas and Silas, so that they also may report the same things by word of mouth.
28 For the holy spirit and we ourselves have favored adding no further burden to you except these necessary things:
29 to keep abstaining from things sacrificed to idols, from blood, from what is strangled, and from sexual immorality. If you carefully keep yourselves from these things, you will prosper. Good health to you!”
30 So when these men were dismissed, they went down to Antioch, and they gathered the whole group together and handed them the letter.
31 After reading it, they rejoiced over the encouragement.
32 And Judas and Silas, since they were also prophets, encouraged the brothers with many talks and strengthened them.
33 After they had spent some time there, they were sent off in peace by the brothers to those who had sent them.
35 But Paul and Barʹna·bas stayed in Antioch, teaching and declaring, along with many others, the good news of the word of Jehovah.
36 After some days, Paul said to Barʹna·bas: “Let us now return and visit the brothers in every one of the cities where we proclaimed the word of Jehovah, to see how they are.”
37 Barʹna·bas was determined to take along John, who was called Mark.
38 Paul, however, was not in favor of taking him along with them, seeing that he had departed from them in Pam·phylʹi·a and had not gone with them to the work.
39 At this there was a sharp burst of anger, so that they separated from each other; and Barʹna·bas took Mark along and sailed away to Cyʹprus.
40 Paul selected Silas and departed after he had been entrusted by the brothers to the undeserved kindness of Jehovah.
41 He went through Syria and Ci·liʹcia, strengthening the congregations.
16 So he arrived at Derʹbe and also at Lysʹtra. And a disciple named Timothy was there, the son of a believing Jewish woman but of a Greek father,
2 and he was well-reported-on by the brothers in Lysʹtra and I·coʹni·um.
3 Paul expressed the desire for Timothy to accompany him, and he took him and circumcised him because of the Jews in those places, for they all knew that his father was a Greek.
4 As they traveled on through the cities, they would deliver to them for observance the decrees that had been decided on by the apostles and the elders who were in Jerusalem.
5 Then, indeed, the congregations continued to be made firm in the faith and to increase in number day by day.
6 Moreover, they traveled through Phrygʹi·a and the country of Ga·laʹti·a, because they were forbidden by the holy spirit to speak the word in the province of Asia.
7 Further, when they came down to Mysʹi·a, they made efforts to go into Bi·thynʹi·a, but the spirit of Jesus did not permit them.
8 So they passed by Mysʹi·a and came down to Troʹas.
9 And during the night a vision appeared to Paul—a Mac·e·doʹni·an man was standing there urging him and saying: “Step over into Mac·e·doʹni·a and help us.”
10 As soon as he had seen the vision, we tried to go into Mac·e·doʹni·a, drawing the conclusion that God had summoned us to declare the good news to them.
11 So we put out to sea from Troʹas and made a straight run to Samʹo·thrace, but on the following day to Ne·apʹo·lis;
12 and from there we went to Phi·lipʹpi, a colony, which is the principal city of the district of Mac·e·doʹni·a. We stayed in this city for some days.
13 On the Sabbath day we went outside the gate beside a river, where we thought there was a place of prayer, and we sat down and began speaking to the women who had assembled.
14 And a woman named Lydʹi·a, a seller of purple from the city of Thy·a·tiʹra and a worshipper of God, was listening, and Jehovah opened her heart wide to pay attention to the things Paul was saying.
15 Now when she and her household got baptized, she urged us: “If you have considered me to be faithful to Jehovah, come and stay at my house.” And she just made us come.
16 Now it happened that as we were going to the place of prayer, a servant girl with a spirit, a demon of divination, met us. She supplied her masters with much profit by fortune-telling.
17 This girl kept following Paul and us and crying out with the words: “These men are slaves of the Most High God and are proclaiming to you the way of salvation.”
18 She kept doing this for many days. Finally Paul got tired of it and turned and said to the spirit: “I order you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her.” And it came out that very hour.
19 Well, when her masters saw that their hope of profit was gone, they seized Paul and Silas and dragged them into the marketplace to the rulers.
20 Leading them up to the civil magistrates, they said: “These men are disturbing our city very much. They are Jews,
21 and they are proclaiming customs that it is not lawful for us to adopt or practice, seeing that we are Romans.”
22 And the crowd rose up together against them, and the civil magistrates, after tearing the garments off them, gave the command to beat them with rods.
23 After they had inflicted many blows on them, they threw them into prison and ordered the jailer to guard them securely.
24 Because he got such an order, he threw them into the inner prison and fastened their feet in the stocks.
25 But about the middle of the night, Paul and Silas were praying and praising God with song, and the prisoners were listening to them.
26 Suddenly a great earthquake occurred, so that the foundations of the jail were shaken. Moreover, all the doors were instantly opened, and everyone’s bonds came loose.
27 When the jailer woke up and saw that the prison doors were open, he drew his sword and was about to kill himself, assuming that the prisoners had escaped.
28 But Paul called out with a loud voice: “Do not hurt yourself, for we are all here!”
29 So he asked for lights and rushed in, and seized with trembling, he fell down before Paul and Silas.
30 He brought them outside and said: “Sirs, what must I do to get saved?”
31 They said: “Believe in the Lord Jesus, and you will get saved, you and your household.”
32 Then they spoke the word of Jehovah to him together with all those in his house.
33 And he took them along in that hour of the night and washed their wounds. Then he and his entire household were baptized without delay.
34 He brought them into his house and set a table before them, and he rejoiced greatly with all his household now that he had believed in God.
35 When it became day, the civil magistrates sent the constables to say: “Release those men.”
36 The jailer reported their words to Paul: “The civil magistrates have sent men to have you two released. So come out now and go in peace.”
37 But Paul said to them: “They flogged us publicly, uncondemned, though we are Romans, and threw us into prison. Are they now throwing us out secretly? No, indeed! Let them come themselves and escort us out.”
38 The constables reported these words to the civil magistrates. These grew fearful when they heard that the men were Romans.
39 So they came and pleaded with them, and after escorting them out, they requested them to depart from the city.
40 But they came out of the prison and went to the home of Lydʹi·a; and when they saw the brothers, they encouraged them and departed.
17 They now traveled through Am·phipʹo·lis and Ap·ol·loʹni·a and came to Thes·sa·lo·niʹca, where there was a synagogue of the Jews.
2 So according to Paul’s custom he went inside to them, and for three sabbaths he reasoned with them from the Scriptures,
3 explaining and proving by references that it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead, saying: “This is the Christ, this Jesus whom I am proclaiming to you.”
4 As a result, some of them became believers and associated themselves with Paul and Silas, and so did a great multitude of the Greeks who worshipped God, along with quite a few of the principal women.
5 But the Jews, getting jealous, gathered together some wicked men who were loitering at the marketplace and formed a mob and proceeded to throw the city into an uproar. They assaulted the house of Jaʹson and were seeking to have Paul and Silas brought out to the mob.
6 When they did not find them, they dragged Jaʹson and some of the brothers to the city rulers, crying out: “These men who have overturned the inhabited earth are present here also,
7 and Jaʹson has received them as his guests. All these men act in opposition to the decrees of Caesar, saying there is another king, Jesus.”
8 When they heard these things, the crowd and the city rulers were alarmed;
9 and after taking sufficient security from Jaʹson and the others, they let them go.
10 Immediately by night the brothers sent both Paul and Silas to Be·roeʹa. On arriving, they went into the synagogue of the Jews.
11 Now these were more noble-minded than those in Thes·sa·lo·niʹca, for they accepted the word with the greatest eagerness of mind, carefully examining the Scriptures daily to see whether these things were so.
12 Therefore, many of them became believers, and so did quite a few of the reputable Greek women as well as some of the men.
13 But when the Jews from Thes·sa·lo·niʹca learned that the word of God was also being proclaimed by Paul in Be·roeʹa, they came there to incite and agitate the crowds.
14 Then the brothers immediately sent Paul away to the sea, but both Silas and Timothy remained behind there.
15 However, those accompanying Paul brought him as far as Athens, and they departed after receiving instructions that Silas and Timothy should come to Paul as quickly as possible.
16 Now while Paul was waiting for them in Athens, his spirit within him became irritated on seeing that the city was full of idols.
17 So he began to reason in the synagogue with the Jews and the other people who worshipped God and every day in the marketplace with those who happened to be on hand.
18 But some of both the Ep·i·cu·reʹan and the Stoʹic philosophers began disputing with him, and some were saying: “What is it this chatterer would like to tell?” Others: “He seems to be a proclaimer of foreign deities.” This was because he was declaring the good news of Jesus and the resurrection.
19 So they took hold of him and led him to the Ar·e·opʹa·gus, saying: “Can we get to know what this new teaching is that you are speaking about?
20 For you are introducing some things that are strange to our ears, and we want to know what these things mean.”
21 In fact, all Athenians and the foreigners staying there would spend their leisure time doing nothing else but telling or listening to something new.
22 Paul now stood in the midst of the Ar·e·opʹa·gus and said: “Men of Athens, I see that in all things you seem to be more given to the fear of the deities than others are.
23 For instance, while passing along and carefully observing your objects of veneration, I found even an altar on which had been inscribed ‘To an Unknown God.’ Therefore, what you are unknowingly worshipping, this I am declaring to you.
24 The God who made the world and all the things in it, being, as he is, Lord of heaven and earth, does not dwell in handmade temples;
25 nor is he served by human hands as if he needed anything, because he himself gives to all people life and breath and all things.
26 And he made out of one man every nation of men to dwell on the entire surface of the earth, and he decreed the appointed times and the set limits of where men would dwell,
27 so that they would seek God, if they might grope for him and really find him, although, in fact, he is not far off from each one of us.
28 For by him we have life and move and exist, even as some of your own poets have said, ‘For we are also his children.’
29 “Therefore, since we are the children of God, we should not think that the Divine Being is like gold or silver or stone, like something sculptured by the art and design of humans.
30 True, God has overlooked the times of such ignorance; but now he is declaring to all people everywhere that they should repent.
31 Because he has set a day on which he purposes to judge the inhabited earth in righteousness by a man whom he has appointed, and he has provided a guarantee to all men by resurrecting him from the dead.”
32 Now when they heard of a resurrection of the dead, some began to scoff, while others said: “We will hear you again about this.”
33 So Paul left them,
34 but some men joined him and became believers. Among them were Di·o·nysʹi·us, who was a judge of the court of the Ar·e·opʹa·gus, and a woman named Damʹa·ris, and others besides them.
18 After this he departed from Athens and came to Corinth.
2 And he found a Jew named Aqʹui·la, a native of Ponʹtus who had recently come from Italy with Pris·cilʹla his wife, because Claudius had ordered all the Jews to leave Rome. So he went to them,
3 and because he had the same trade, he stayed at their home and worked with them, for they were tentmakers by trade.
4 He would give a talk in the synagogue every sabbath and would persuade Jews and Greeks.
5 When, now, both Silas and Timothy came down from Mac·e·doʹni·a, Paul began to be intensely occupied with the word, witnessing to the Jews to prove that Jesus is the Christ.
6 But after they kept on opposing him and speaking abusively, he shook out his garments and said to them: “Let your blood be on your own heads. I am clean. From now on I will go to people of the nations.”
7 So he transferred from there and went into the house of a man named Titius Justus, a worshipper of God, whose house adjoined the synagogue.
8 But Crisʹpus, the presiding officer of the synagogue, became a believer in the Lord, along with all his household. And many of the Corinthians who heard began to believe and be baptized.
9 Moreover, the Lord said to Paul in a vision by night: “Do not be afraid, but keep on speaking and do not keep silent,
10 for I am with you and no man will assault you to harm you; for I have many people in this city.”
11 So he stayed there for a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them.
12 While Galʹli·o was proconsul of A·chaʹia, the Jews made a concerted attack against Paul and led him to the judgment seat,
13 saying: “This man is persuading people to worship God in a way contrary to the law.”
14 But as Paul was about to speak, Galʹli·o said to the Jews: “If, indeed, it were some wrong or a serious crime, O Jews, it would be reasonable for me to hear you out patiently.
15 But if it is controversies over speech and names and your own law, you yourselves must see to it. I do not wish to be a judge of these things.”
16 With that he drove them away from the judgment seat.
17 So they all seized Sosʹthe·nes, the presiding officer of the synagogue, and began beating him in front of the judgment seat. But Galʹli·o would not get involved at all with these things.
18 However, after staying quite a few days longer, Paul said good-bye to the brothers and sailed away for Syria, accompanied by Pris·cilʹla and Aqʹui·la. He had his hair clipped short in Cenʹchre·ae, for he had made a vow.
19 So they arrived at Ephʹe·sus, and he left them there; but he entered the synagogue and reasoned with the Jews.
20 Although they kept requesting him to stay longer, he would not consent
21 but said good-bye and told them: “I will return to you again, if Jehovah is willing.” And he put out to sea from Ephʹe·sus
22 and came down to Caes·a·reʹa. And he went up and greeted the congregation and then went down to Antioch.
23 After spending some time there, he departed and went from place to place through the country of Ga·laʹti·a and Phrygʹi·a, strengthening all the disciples.
24 Now a Jew named A·polʹlos, a native of Alexandria, arrived in Ephʹe·sus; he was an eloquent man who was well-versed in the Scriptures.
25 This man had been instructed in the way of Jehovah, and aglow with the spirit, he was speaking and teaching accurately the things about Jesus, but he was acquainted only with the baptism of John.
26 He began to speak boldly in the synagogue, and when Pris·cilʹla and Aqʹui·la heard him, they took him into their company and explained the way of God more accurately to him.
27 Further, because he wanted to go across to A·chaʹia, the brothers wrote to the disciples, urging them to receive him kindly. So when he got there, he greatly helped those who through God’s undeserved kindness had become believers;
28 for publicly and with great intensity he thoroughly proved the Jews to be wrong, showing them from the Scriptures that Jesus is the Christ.
20 When the uproar had subsided, Paul sent for the disciples, and after he had encouraged them and said farewell, he began his journey to Mac·e·doʹni·a.
2 After going through those regions and giving many words of encouragement to the ones there, he arrived in Greece.
3 He spent three months there, but because a plot was hatched against him by the Jews when he was about to set sail for Syria, he made up his mind to return through Mac·e·doʹni·a.
4 He was accompanied by Sopʹa·ter the son of Pyrʹrhus of Be·roeʹa, Ar·is·tarʹchus and Se·cunʹdus of the Thes·sa·loʹni·ans, Gaʹius of Derʹbe, Timothy and, from the province of Asia, Tychʹi·cus and Trophʹi·mus.
5 These men went on ahead and were waiting for us in Troʹas;
6 but we put out to sea from Phi·lipʹpi after the days of the Unleavened Bread, and within five days we came to them in Troʹas, and there we spent seven days.
7 On the first day of the week, when we were gathered together to have a meal, Paul began addressing them, as he was going to depart the next day; and he prolonged his speech until midnight.
8 So there were quite a few lamps in the upper room where we were gathered together.
9 Seated at the window, a young man named Euʹty·chus sank into a deep sleep while Paul kept talking, and overcome by sleep, he fell down from the third story and was picked up dead.
10 But Paul went downstairs, threw himself on him and embraced him, and said: “Stop making a commotion, for he is alive.”
11 He then went upstairs and began the meal and ate. He continued conversing for quite a while, until daybreak, and then he departed.
12 So they took the boy away alive and were comforted beyond measure.
13 We now went ahead to the ship and set sail for Asʹsos, where we were intending to take Paul aboard, for after giving instructions to this effect, he was intending to go there on foot.
14 So when he caught up with us in Asʹsos, we took him aboard and went to Mit·y·leʹne.
15 And sailing away from there the next day, we arrived off Chiʹos, but the day after that, we touched at Saʹmos, and on the following day, we arrived at Mi·leʹtus.
16 Paul had decided to sail past Ephʹe·sus so as not to spend any time in the province of Asia, for he was hurrying to get to Jerusalem on the day of the Festival of Pentecost if he possibly could.
17 However, from Mi·leʹtus he sent word to Ephʹe·sus and called for the elders of the congregation.
18 When they came to him, he said to them: “You well know how I conducted myself among you from the first day I stepped into the province of Asia,
19 slaving for the Lord with all humility and with tears and trials that befell me by the plots of the Jews,
20 while I did not hold back from telling you any of the things that were profitable nor from teaching you publicly and from house to house.
21 But I thoroughly bore witness both to Jews and to Greeks about repentance toward God and faith in our Lord Jesus.
22 And now look! bound in the spirit, I am traveling to Jerusalem, although not knowing what will happen to me there,
23 except that from city to city the holy spirit repeatedly bears witness to me, saying that imprisonment and tribulations are waiting for me.
24 Nevertheless, I do not consider my own life of any importance to me, if only I may finish my course and the ministry that I received from the Lord Jesus, to bear thorough witness to the good news of the undeserved kindness of God.
25 “And now look! I know that none of you among whom I preached the Kingdom will ever see my face again.
26 So I call you to witness this very day that I am clean from the blood of all men,
27 for I have not held back from telling you all the counsel of God.
28 Pay attention to yourselves and to all the flock, among which the holy spirit has appointed you overseers, to shepherd the congregation of God, which he purchased with the blood of his own Son.
29 I know that after my going away oppressive wolves will enter in among you and will not treat the flock with tenderness,
30 and from among you yourselves men will rise and speak twisted things to draw away the disciples after themselves.
31 “Therefore keep awake, and bear in mind that for three years, night and day, I never stopped admonishing each one of you with tears.
32 And now I entrust you to God and to the word of his undeserved kindness, which word can build you up and give you the inheritance among all the sanctified ones.
33 I have desired no man’s silver or gold or clothing.
34 You yourselves know that these hands have provided for my own needs and the needs of those with me.
35 I have shown you in all things that by working hard in this way, you must assist those who are weak and must keep in mind the words of the Lord Jesus, when he himself said: ‘There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.’”
36 And when he had said these things, he knelt down with all of them and prayed.
37 Indeed, quite a bit of weeping broke out among them all, and they embraced Paul and affectionately kissed him,
38 for they were especially pained at the word he had spoken that they would not see his face anymore. Then they accompanied him to the ship.
21 After tearing ourselves away from them and putting out to sea, we ran with a straight course and came to Cos, on the next day to Rhodes, and from there to Patʹa·ra.
2 When we found a ship that was crossing to Phoe·niʹcia, we went aboard and sailed away.
3 After coming in sight of the island of Cyʹprus, we left it behind on the left side and sailed on to Syria and landed at Tyre, where the ship was to unload its cargo.
4 We searched for and found the disciples and remained there for seven days. But through the spirit they repeatedly told Paul not to set foot in Jerusalem.
5 So when our time there was over, we left and started on our way, but they all, together with the women and children, accompanied us until we were outside the city. And kneeling down on the beach, we prayed
6 and said good-bye to one another. Then we went aboard the ship, and they returned to their homes.
7 We then completed the voyage from Tyre and arrived at Ptol·e·maʹis, and we greeted the brothers and stayed one day with them.
8 The next day we left and came to Caes·a·reʹa, and we entered the house of Philip the evangelizer, who was one of the seven men, and we stayed with him.
9 This man had four unmarried daughters who prophesied.
10 But after we had stayed there for quite a number of days, a prophet named Agʹa·bus came down from Ju·deʹa.
11 And he came to us and took Paul’s belt and tied his own feet and hands and said: “Thus says the holy spirit, ‘The man to whom this belt belongs will be bound like this by the Jews in Jerusalem, and they will give him into the hands of people of the nations.’”
12 Now when we heard this, both we and those who were there began begging him not to go up to Jerusalem.
13 Then Paul answered: “What are you doing by weeping and trying to weaken my resolve? Rest assured, I am ready not only to be bound but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.”
14 When he would not be dissuaded, we stopped objecting and said: “Let the will of Jehovah take place.”
15 Now after these days we prepared for the journey and started on our way to Jerusalem.
16 Some of the disciples from Caes·a·reʹa also went with us, taking us to Mnaʹson of Cyʹprus, an early disciple at whose home we were to be guests.
17 When we got to Jerusalem, the brothers welcomed us gladly.
18 But on the following day Paul went in with us to James, and all the elders were present.
19 And he greeted them and began giving a detailed account of the things God did among the nations through his ministry.
20 After hearing this, they began to glorify God, but they said to him: “You see, brother, how many thousands of believers there are among the Jews, and they are all zealous for the Law.
21 But they have heard it rumored about you that you have been teaching all the Jews among the nations an apostasy from Moses, telling them not to circumcise their children or to follow the customary practices.
22 What, then, is to be done about it? They are certainly going to hear that you have arrived.
23 So do what we tell you: We have four men who have put themselves under a vow.
24 Take these men with you and cleanse yourself ceremonially together with them and take care of their expenses, so that they may have their heads shaved. Then everyone will know that there is nothing to the rumors they were told about you, but that you are walking orderly and you are also keeping the Law.
25 As for the believers from among the nations, we have sent them our decision in writing that they should keep away from what is sacrificed to idols as well as from blood, from what is strangled, and from sexual immorality.”
26 Then Paul took the men the next day and cleansed himself ceremonially along with them, and he went into the temple to give notice of when the days for the ceremonial cleansing would be completed and the offering should be presented for each one of them.
27 Now when the seven days were about to end, the Jews from Asia, on seeing him in the temple, stirred up the whole crowd, and they seized him,
28 shouting: “Men of Israel, help! This is the man who teaches everyone everywhere against our people and our Law and this place. And what is more, he even brought Greeks into the temple and has defiled this holy place.”
29 For they had previously seen Trophʹi·mus the E·pheʹsian in the city with him, and they assumed that Paul had brought him into the temple.
30 The whole city was in an uproar, and the people came running together and seized Paul and dragged him outside the temple, and immediately the doors were closed.
31 While they were trying to kill him, word reached the commander of the army unit that all Jerusalem was in confusion;
32 and he immediately took soldiers and army officers and ran down to them. When they caught sight of the military commander and the soldiers, they stopped beating Paul.
33 Then the military commander came near and took him into custody and ordered that he be bound with two chains; then he inquired who he was and what he had done.
34 But some in the crowd began shouting out one thing, and others something else. So being unable himself to learn anything for certain because of the disturbance, he commanded him to be brought to the soldiers’ quarters.
35 But when he reached the stairs, he had to be carried by the soldiers because of the violence of the crowd,
36 for a crowd of the people kept following, crying out: “Do away with him!”
37 As he was about to be led into the soldiers’ quarters, Paul said to the military commander: “Am I allowed to say something to you?” He said: “Can you speak Greek?
38 Are you not, then, the Egyptian who some time ago stirred up a sedition and led the 4,000 dagger men out into the wilderness?”
39 Then Paul said: “I am, in fact, a Jew, of Tarsus in Ci·liʹcia, a citizen of no obscure city. So I beg you, permit me to speak to the people.”
40 After he gave permission, Paul, standing on the stairs, motioned with his hand to the people. When a great silence fell, he addressed them in the Hebrew language, saying:
22 “Men, brothers and fathers, hear my defense to you now.”
2 Well, when they heard that he was addressing them in the Hebrew language, they kept all the more silent, and he said:
3 “I am a Jew, born in Tarsus of Ci·liʹcia, but educated in this city at the feet of Ga·maʹli·el, instructed according to the strictness of the ancestral Law, and zealous for God just as all of you are this day.
4 I persecuted this Way to the point of death, binding and handing over to prisons both men and women,
5 as the high priest and all the assembly of elders can bear witness. From them I also obtained letters to the brothers in Damascus, and I was on my way to bring those who were there in bonds to Jerusalem to be punished.
6 “But as I was traveling and getting near to Damascus, about midday, suddenly out of heaven a great light flashed all around me,
7 and I fell to the ground and heard a voice say to me: ‘Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?’
8 I answered: ‘Who are you, Lord?’ And he said to me: ‘I am Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ, whom you are persecuting.’
9 Now the men who were with me did see the light, but they did not hear the voice of the one speaking to me.
10 At that I said: ‘What should I do, Lord?’ The Lord said to me: ‘Rise, go into Damascus, and there you will be told about everything it is appointed for you to do.’
11 But since I could not see anything because of the glory of that light, I arrived in Damascus led by the hand of those who were with me.
12 “Then a man named An·a·niʹas, a devout man according to the Law, well-reported-on by all the Jews living there,
13 came to me. He stood by me and said to me: ‘Saul, brother, regain your sight!’ And that very moment I looked up and saw him.
14 He said: ‘The God of our forefathers has chosen you to come to know his will and to see the righteous one and to hear the voice of his mouth,
15 because you are to be a witness for him to all men of the things you have seen and heard.
16 And now why are you delaying? Rise, get baptized, and wash your sins away by your calling on his name.’
17 “But when I had returned to Jerusalem and was praying in the temple, I fell into a trance
18 and saw him saying to me: ‘Hurry up and get out of Jerusalem quickly, because they will not accept your witness concerning me.’
19 And I said: ‘Lord, they themselves well know that I used to imprison and flog in one synagogue after another those believing in you;
20 and when the blood of Stephen your witness was being spilled, I was standing by and approving and guarding the outer garments of those doing away with him.’
21 And yet he said to me: ‘Go, because I will send you out to nations far away.’”
22 Now they kept listening to him down to this word. Then they raised their voices, saying: “Take such a man away from the earth, for he is not fit to live!”
23 Because they were crying out, throwing their outer garments about, and tossing dust into the air,
24 the military commander ordered Paul to be brought into the soldiers’ quarters and said that he should be interrogated under scourging, so that he could learn exactly why they were shouting against Paul this way.
25 But when they had stretched him out for the whipping, Paul said to the army officer standing there: “Is it lawful for you to scourge a Roman who has not been condemned?”
26 Well, when the army officer heard this, he went to the military commander and reported it, saying: “What are you intending to do? For this man is a Roman.”
27 So the military commander approached and said to him: “Tell me, are you a Roman?” He said: “Yes.”
28 The military commander responded: “I purchased these rights as a citizen for a large sum of money.” Paul said: “But I have them by birth.”
29 Immediately, therefore, the men who were about to interrogate him under torture backed away from him; and the military commander became afraid when he realized that he was a Roman and that he had bound him in chains.
30 So the next day, because he wanted to know for sure just why he was being accused by the Jews, he released him and commanded the chief priests and all the Sanʹhe·drin to assemble. He then brought Paul down and had him stand among them.
25 Therefore Festus, after arriving in the province and taking charge, went up three days later to Jerusalem from Caes·a·reʹa.
2 And the chief priests and the principal men of the Jews gave him information against Paul. So they began to beg Festus
3 as a favor to send for Paul to come to Jerusalem. But they were planning to ambush Paul and kill him along the road.
4 However, Festus answered that Paul was to be kept in Caes·a·reʹa and that he himself was about to go back there shortly.
5 “So let those who are in power among you,” he said, “come down with me and accuse him if, indeed, the man has done something wrong.”
6 So when he had spent not more than eight or ten days among them, he went down to Caes·a·reʹa, and the next day he sat down on the judgment seat and commanded Paul to be brought in.
7 When he came in, the Jews who had come down from Jerusalem stood around him, bringing against him many serious charges that they were unable to prove.
8 But Paul said in defense: “Neither against the Law of the Jews nor against the temple nor against Caesar have I committed any sin.”
9 Festus, desiring to gain favor with the Jews, said in reply to Paul: “Do you wish to go up to Jerusalem and be judged before me there concerning these things?”
10 But Paul said: “I am standing before the judgment seat of Caesar, where I ought to be judged. I have done no wrong to the Jews, of which you are also becoming well-aware.
11 If I am really a wrongdoer and have committed anything deserving of death, I do not beg off from dying; but if there is no substance to the accusations these men have made against me, no man has the right to hand me over to them as a favor. I appeal to Caesar!”
12 Then Festus, after speaking with the assembly of counselors, replied: “To Caesar you have appealed; to Caesar you will go.”
13 After some days had passed, A·gripʹpa the king and Bernice arrived in Caes·a·reʹa for a courtesy visit to Festus.
14 Since they were spending a number of days there, Festus presented Paul’s case to the king, saying: “There is a man who was left as a prisoner by Felix,
15 and when I was in Jerusalem the chief priests and the elders of the Jews brought information about him, asking for a judgment of condemnation against him.
16 But I replied to them that it is not Roman procedure to hand any man over as a favor before the accused man meets his accusers face-to-face and gets a chance to speak in his defense concerning the complaint.
17 So when they arrived here, I did not delay, but the next day I sat down on the judgment seat and commanded the man to be brought in.
18 Taking the stand, the accusers did not charge him with any of the wicked things I had expected concerning him.
19 They simply had certain disputes with him concerning their own worship of the deity and concerning a man named Jesus, who was dead but who Paul kept asserting was alive.
20 Being at a loss as to how to handle this dispute, I asked if he would like to go to Jerusalem and be judged there concerning these matters.
21 But when Paul appealed to be kept in custody for the decision by the August One, I commanded him to be held until I should send him on to Caesar.”
22 A·gripʹpa then said to Festus: “I would like to hear the man myself.” “Tomorrow,” he said, “you will hear him.”
23 So the next day A·gripʹpa and Bernice came with much pompous show and entered the audience chamber together with military commanders as well as the prominent men in the city; and when Festus gave the command, Paul was brought in.
24 And Festus said: “King A·gripʹpa and all you who are present with us, you see this man about whom the whole Jewish populace have petitioned me both in Jerusalem and here, shouting that he ought not to live any longer.
25 But I perceived that he had done nothing deserving of death. So when this man himself appealed to the August One, I decided to send him.
26 But I have nothing certain to write about him to my Lord. So I brought him before all of you, and especially before you, King A·gripʹpa, so that after the judicial examination has taken place, I might have something to write.
27 For it seems unreasonable to me to send a prisoner and not also to indicate the charges against him.”
28 After we made it to safety, we learned that the island was called Malta.
2 And the foreign-speaking people showed us extraordinary kindness. They kindled a fire and received all of us kindly because of the rain that was falling and because of the cold.
3 But when Paul collected a bundle of sticks and laid it on the fire, a viper came out because of the heat and fastened itself on his hand.
4 When the foreign-speaking people caught sight of the venomous creature hanging from his hand, they began saying to one another: “Surely this man is a murderer, and although he made it to safety from the sea, Justice did not permit him to keep on living.”
5 However, he shook the creature off into the fire and suffered no harm.
6 But they were expecting him to swell up or suddenly to drop dead. After they waited for a long time and saw that nothing bad happened to him, they changed their mind and began saying he was a god.
7 Now in the neighborhood of that place were lands belonging to the principal man of the island, whose name was Pubʹli·us, and he welcomed us and entertained us hospitably for three days.
8 It so happened that the father of Pubʹli·us was lying in bed sick with fever and dysentery, and Paul went in to him and prayed, laid his hands on him, and healed him.
9 After this occurred, the rest of the people on the island who were sick also began to come to him and be cured.
10 They also honored us with many gifts, and when we were setting sail, they loaded us up with whatever we needed.
11 Three months later we set sail in a ship with the figurehead “Sons of Zeus.” The ship was from Alexandria and had wintered in the island.
12 Putting into port at Syracuse, we remained there for three days;
13 from there we went along and arrived at Rheʹgi·um. A day later a south wind sprang up and we made it into Pu·teʹo·li on the second day.
14 Here we found brothers and were urged to remain with them for seven days, and so we went toward Rome.
15 From there the brothers, when they heard the news about us, came as far as the Marketplace of Apʹpi·us and Three Taverns to meet us. On catching sight of them, Paul thanked God and took courage.
16 When finally we entered Rome, Paul was permitted to stay by himself with the soldier guarding him.
17 However, three days later he called together the principal men of the Jews. When they had assembled, he said to them: “Men, brothers, although I had done nothing contrary to the people or the customs of our forefathers, I was handed over as a prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans.
18 And after making an examination, they wanted to release me, for there were no grounds for putting me to death.
19 But when the Jews objected, I was compelled to appeal to Caesar, but not because I had any accusation to make against my nation.
20 So for this reason I asked to see and speak to you, for it is because of the hope of Israel that I have this chain around me.”
21 They said to him: “We have not received letters about you from Ju·deʹa, nor have any of the brothers who came from there reported or spoken anything bad about you.
22 But we think it proper to hear from you what your thoughts are, for truly as regards this sect, we know that it is spoken against everywhere.”
23 They now arranged for a day to meet with him, and they came in even greater numbers to him in his lodging place. And from morning to evening, he explained the matter to them by bearing thorough witness concerning the Kingdom of God, to persuade them about Jesus from both the Law of Moses and the Prophets.
24 Some began to believe the things he said; others would not believe.
25 So because they disagreed with one another, they began to leave, and Paul made this one comment: “The holy spirit aptly spoke through Isaiah the prophet to your forefathers,
26 saying, ‘Go to this people and say: “You will indeed hear but by no means understand, and you will indeed look but by no means see.
27 For the heart of this people has grown unreceptive, and with their ears they have heard without response, and they have shut their eyes, so that they might never see with their eyes and hear with their ears and understand with their heart and turn back and I heal them.”’
28 So let it be known to you that this salvation from God has been sent out to the nations; they will certainly listen to it.”
30 So he remained there for an entire two years in his own rented house, and he would kindly receive all those who came to him,
31 preaching the Kingdom of God to them and teaching about the Lord Jesus Christ with the greatest freeness of speech, without hindrance.
1 Paul, a slave of Christ Jesus and called to be an apostle, set apart for God’s good news,
2 which he promised beforehand through his prophets in the holy Scriptures,
3 concerning his Son, who came to be from the offspring of David according to the flesh,
4 but who with power was declared God’s Son according to the spirit of holiness by means of resurrection from the dead—yes, Jesus Christ our Lord.
5 Through him we received undeserved kindness and an apostleship with a view to obedience by faith among all the nations respecting his name,
6 among which nations you also have been called to belong to Jesus Christ—
7 to all those who are in Rome as God’s beloved ones, called to be holy ones: May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
8 First of all, I give thanks to my God through Jesus Christ concerning all of you, because your faith is talked about throughout the whole world.
9 For God, to whom I render sacred service with my spirit in connection with the good news about his Son, is my witness of how without ceasing I always mention you in my prayers,
10 begging that if at all possible I may now at last succeed in coming to you by God’s will.
11 For I am longing to see you, that I may impart some spiritual gift to you for you to be made firm;
12 or, rather, that we may have an interchange of encouragement by one another’s faith, both yours and mine.
13 But I do not want you to be unaware, brothers, that many times I have intended to come to you—but I have been prevented until now—in order that I might acquire some fruitage also among you just as among the rest of the nations.
14 Both to Greeks and to foreigners, both to wise and to senseless ones, I am a debtor;
15 so I am eager to declare the good news also to you there in Rome.
16 For I am not ashamed of the good news; it is, in fact, God’s power for salvation to everyone having faith, to the Jew first and also to the Greek.
17 For in it God’s righteousness is being revealed by faith and for faith, just as it is written: “But the righteous one will live by reason of faith.”
18 For God’s wrath is being revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men who are suppressing the truth in an unrighteous way,
19 because what may be known about God is clearly evident among them, for God made it clear to them.
20 For his invisible qualities are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward, because they are perceived by the things made, even his eternal power and Godship, so that they are inexcusable.
21 For although they knew God, they did not glorify him as God nor did they thank him, but they became empty-headed in their reasonings and their senseless hearts became darkened.
22 Although claiming they were wise, they became foolish
23 and turned the glory of the incorruptible God into something like the image of corruptible man and birds and four-footed creatures and reptiles.
24 Therefore, God, in keeping with the desires of their hearts, gave them up to uncleanness, so that their bodies might be dishonored among them.
25 They exchanged the truth of God for the lie and venerated and rendered sacred service to the creation rather than the Creator, who is praised forever. Amen.
26 That is why God gave them over to uncontrolled sexual passion, for their females changed the natural use of themselves into one contrary to nature;
27 likewise also the males left the natural use of the female and became violently inflamed in their lust toward one another, males with males, working what is obscene and receiving in themselves the full penalty, which was due for their error.
28 Just as they did not see fit to acknowledge God, God gave them over to a disapproved mental state, to do the things not fitting.
29 And they were filled with all unrighteousness, wickedness, greed, and badness, being full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, and malice, being whisperers,
30 backbiters, haters of God, insolent, haughty, boastful, schemers of what is harmful, disobedient to parents,
31 without understanding, false to agreements, having no natural affection, and merciless.
32 Although these know full well the righteous decree of God—that those practicing such things are deserving of death—they not only keep on doing them but also approve of those practicing them.
2 Therefore you are inexcusable, O man, whoever you are, if you judge; for when you judge another, you condemn yourself, because you who judge practice the same things.
2 Now we know that God’s judgment is in harmony with truth, against those who practice such things.
3 But do you suppose, O man, that while you judge those who practice such things and yet you do them, you will escape the judgment of God?
4 Or do you despise the riches of his kindness and forbearance and patience, because you do not know that God in his kindness is trying to lead you to repentance?
5 But according to your stubbornness and your unrepentant heart, you are storing up wrath for yourself on the day of wrath and of the revealing of God’s righteous judgment.
6 And he will pay back to each one according to his works:
7 everlasting life to those who are seeking glory and honor and incorruptibleness by endurance in work that is good;
8 however, for those who are contentious and who disobey the truth but obey unrighteousness, there will be wrath and anger.
9 There will be tribulation and distress on every person who works what is harmful, on the Jew first and also on the Greek;
10 but glory and honor and peace for everyone who works what is good, for the Jew first and also for the Greek.
11 For there is no partiality with God.
12 For all those who sinned without law will also perish without law; but all those who sinned under law will be judged by law.
13 For the hearers of law are not the ones righteous before God, but the doers of law will be declared righteous.
14 For when people of the nations, who do not have law, do by nature the things of the law, these people, although not having law, are a law to themselves.
15 They are the very ones who demonstrate the matter of the law to be written in their hearts, while their conscience is bearing witness with them, and by their own thoughts they are being accused or even excused.
16 This will take place in the day when God through Christ Jesus judges the secret things of mankind, according to the good news I declare.
17 If, now, you are a Jew in name and rely on law and take pride in God,
18 and you know his will and approve of things that are excellent because you are instructed out of the Law,
19 and you are convinced that you are a guide of the blind, a light for those in darkness,
20 a corrector of the unreasonable ones, a teacher of young children, and having the framework of the knowledge and of the truth in the Law—
21 do you, however, the one teaching someone else, not teach yourself? You, the one preaching, “Do not steal,” do you steal?
22 You, the one saying, “Do not commit adultery,” do you commit adultery? You, the one abhorring idols, do you rob temples?
23 You who take pride in law, do you dishonor God by your transgressing of the Law?
24 For “the name of God is being blasphemed among the nations because of you,” just as it is written.
25 Circumcision is, in fact, of benefit only if you practice law; but if you are a transgressor of law, your circumcision has become uncircumcision.
26 If, therefore, an uncircumcised person keeps the righteous requirements of the Law, his uncircumcision will be counted as circumcision, will it not?
27 And the physically uncircumcised person will, by carrying out the Law, judge you who are a transgressor of law despite having its written code and circumcision.
28 For he is not a Jew who is one on the outside, nor is circumcision something on the outside, on the flesh.
29 But he is a Jew who is one on the inside, and his circumcision is that of the heart by spirit and not by a written code. That person’s praise comes from God, not from people.
3 What, then, is the advantage of the Jew, or what is the benefit of circumcision?
2 A great deal in every way. First of all, that they were entrusted with the sacred pronouncements of God.
3 What, then, is the case? If some lacked faith, will their lack of faith invalidate the faithfulness of God?
4 Certainly not! But let God be found true, even if every man be found a liar, just as it is written: “That you might be proved righteous in your words and might win when you are being judged.”
5 However, if our unrighteousness highlights God’s righteousness, what are we to say? God is not unjust when he expresses his wrath, is he? (I am speaking in human terms.)
6 By no means! How, otherwise, will God judge the world?
7 But if by my lie the truth of God has been made more prominent to his glory, why am I also being judged as a sinner?
8 And why not say, just as some men falsely claim that we say, “Let us do bad things that good things may come”? The judgment against those men is in harmony with justice.
9 What then? Are we in a better position? Not at all! For above we have made the charge that Jews as well as Greeks are all under sin;
10 just as it is written: “There is not a righteous man, not even one;
11 there is no one who has any insight; there is no one who searches for God.
12 All men have turned aside, all of them have become worthless; there is no one who shows kindness, not so much as one.”
13 “Their throat is an open grave; they have deceived with their tongues.” “Venom of asps is behind their lips.”
14 “And their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness.”
15 “Their feet are swift to shed blood.”
16 “Ruin and misery are in their ways,
17 and they have not known the way of peace.”
18 “There is no fear of God before their eyes.”
19 Now we know that all the things the Law says, it addresses to those under the Law, so that every mouth may be silenced and all the world may become accountable to God for punishment.
20 Therefore, no one will be declared righteous before him by works of law, for by law comes the accurate knowledge of sin.
21 But now apart from law God’s righteousness has been revealed, as the Law and the Prophets bear witness,
22 yes, God’s righteousness through the faith in Jesus Christ, for all those having faith. For there is no distinction.
23 For all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God,
24 and it is as a free gift that they are being declared righteous by his undeserved kindness through the release by the ransom paid by Christ Jesus.
25 God presented him as an offering for propitiation through faith in his blood. This was to demonstrate his own righteousness, because God in his forbearance was forgiving the sins that occurred in the past.
26 This was to demonstrate his own righteousness in this present season, so that he might be righteous even when declaring righteous the man who has faith in Jesus.
27 Where, then, is the boasting? There is no place for it. Through what law? That of works? No indeed, but through the law of faith.
28 For we consider that a man is declared righteous by faith apart from works of law.
29 Or is he the God of the Jews only? Is he not also the God of people of the nations? Yes, also of people of the nations.
30 Since God is one, he will declare circumcised people righteous as a result of faith and uncircumcised people righteous by means of their faith.
31 Do we, then, abolish law by means of our faith? Not at all! On the contrary, we uphold law.
4 That being so, what will we say was gained by Abraham, our forefather according to the flesh?
2 For instance, if Abraham was declared righteous as a result of works, he would have reason to boast, but not with God.
3 For what does the scripture say? “Abraham put faith in Jehovah, and it was counted to him as righteousness.”
4 Now to the man who works, his pay is not counted as an undeserved kindness but as something owed to him.
5 On the other hand, to the man who does not work but puts faith in the One who declares the ungodly one righteous, his faith is counted as righteousness.
6 Just as David also speaks of the happiness of the man to whom God counts righteousness apart from works:
7 “Happy are those whose lawless deeds have been pardoned and whose sins have been covered;
8 happy is the man whose sin Jehovah will by no means take into account.”
9 Does this happiness, then, only come to circumcised people or also to uncircumcised people? For we say: “Abraham’s faith was counted to him as righteousness.”
10 Under what circumstances, then, was it counted as righteousness? When he was circumcised or uncircumcised? He was not yet circumcised but was uncircumcised.
11 And he received a sign—namely, circumcision—as a seal of the righteousness by the faith he had while in his uncircumcised state, so that he might be the father of all those having faith while uncircumcised, in order for righteousness to be counted to them;
12 and so that he might be a father to circumcised offspring, not only to those who adhere to circumcision but also to those who walk orderly in the footsteps of the faith that our father Abraham had while in the uncircumcised state.
13 For it was not through law that Abraham or his offspring had the promise that he should be heir of a world, but it was through righteousness by faith.
14 For if those who adhere to law are heirs, faith becomes useless and the promise has been abolished.
15 In reality the Law produces wrath, but where there is no law, neither is there any transgression.
16 That is why it is through faith, so that it might be according to undeserved kindness, in order for the promise to be sure to all his offspring, not only to those who adhere to the Law but also to those who adhere to the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all.
17 (This is just as it is written: “I have appointed you a father of many nations.”) This was in the sight of God, in whom he had faith, who makes the dead alive and calls the things that are not as though they are.
18 Although beyond hope, yet based on hope, he had faith that he would become the father of many nations according to what had been said: “So your offspring will be.”
19 And although he did not grow weak in faith, he considered his own body, now as good as dead (since he was about 100 years old), as well as the deadness of the womb of Sarah.
20 But because of the promise of God, he did not waver in a lack of faith; but he became powerful by his faith, giving God glory
21 and being fully convinced that what He had promised He was also able to do.
22 Therefore, “it was counted to him as righteousness.”
23 However, the words “it was counted to him” were not written for his sake only,
24 but also for our sake, to whom it will be counted, because we believe in Him who raised Jesus our Lord up from the dead.
25 He was handed over for the sake of our trespasses and was raised up for the sake of declaring us righteous.
5 Therefore, now that we have been declared righteous as a result of faith, let us enjoy peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
2 through whom we also have obtained access by faith into this undeserved kindness in which we now stand; and let us rejoice, based on hope of the glory of God.
3 Not only that, but let us rejoice while in tribulations, since we know that tribulation produces endurance;
4 endurance, in turn, an approved condition; the approved condition, in turn, hope,
5 and the hope does not lead to disappointment; because the love of God has been poured out into our hearts through the holy spirit, which was given to us.
6 For, indeed, while we were still weak, Christ died for ungodly men at the appointed time.
7 For hardly would anyone die for a righteous man; though perhaps for a good man someone may dare to die.
8 But God recommends his own love to us in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.
9 Much more, then, since we have now been declared righteous by his blood, will we be saved through him from wrath.
10 For if when we were enemies we became reconciled to God through the death of his Son, how much more we will be saved by his life, now that we have become reconciled.
11 Not only that, but we are also rejoicing in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received the reconciliation.
12 That is why, just as through one man sin entered into the world and death through sin, and so death spread to all men because they had all sinned—.
13 For sin was in the world before the Law, but sin is not charged against anyone when there is no law.
14 Nevertheless, death ruled as king from Adam down to Moses, even over those who had not sinned in the same way that Adam transgressed, who bears a resemblance to the one who was to come.
15 But the gift is not like the trespass. For if by one man’s trespass many died, how much more did the undeserved kindness of God and his free gift by the undeserved kindness of the one man, Jesus Christ, abound to many!
16 Also, it is not the same with the free gift as with the way things worked through the one man who sinned. For the judgment after one trespass was condemnation, but the gift after many trespasses was a declaration of righteousness.
17 For if by the trespass of the one man death ruled as king through that one, how much more will those who receive the abundance of the undeserved kindness and of the free gift of righteousness rule as kings in life through the one person, Jesus Christ!
18 So, then, as through one trespass the result to men of all sorts was condemnation, so too through one act of justification the result to men of all sorts is their being declared righteous for life.
19 For just as through the disobedience of the one man many were made sinners, so also through the obedience of the one person many will be made righteous.
20 Now the Law came on the scene so that trespassing might increase. But where sin abounded, undeserved kindness abounded still more.
21 To what end? So that just as sin ruled as king with death, so also undeserved kindness might rule as king through righteousness leading to everlasting life through Jesus Christ our Lord.
6 What are we to say then? Should we continue in sin so that undeserved kindness may increase?
2 Certainly not! Seeing that we died with reference to sin, how can we keep living any longer in it?
3 Or do you not know that all of us who were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death?
4 So we were buried with him through our baptism into his death, in order that just as Christ was raised up from the dead through the glory of the Father, so we also should walk in a newness of life.
5 If we have become united with him in the likeness of his death, we will certainly also be united with him in the likeness of his resurrection.
6 For we know that our old personality was nailed to the stake along with him in order for our sinful body to be made powerless, so that we should no longer go on being slaves to sin.
7 For the one who has died has been acquitted from his sin.
8 Moreover, if we have died with Christ, we believe that we will also live with him.
9 For we know that Christ, now that he has been raised up from the dead, dies no more; death is no longer master over him.
10 For the death that he died, he died with reference to sin once for all time, but the life that he lives, he lives with reference to God.
11 Likewise you, consider yourselves to be dead with reference to sin but living with reference to God by Christ Jesus.
12 Therefore, do not let sin continue to rule as king in your mortal bodies so that you should obey their desires.
13 Neither go on presenting your bodies to sin as weapons of unrighteousness, but present yourselves to God as those alive from the dead, also your bodies to God as weapons of righteousness.
14 For sin must not be master over you, seeing that you are not under law but under undeserved kindness.
15 What follows? Are we to commit a sin because we are not under law but under undeserved kindness? Certainly not!
16 Do you not know that if you present yourselves to anyone as obedient slaves, you are slaves of the one you obey, either of sin leading to death or of obedience leading to righteousness?
17 But thanks to God that although you were once the slaves of sin, you became obedient from the heart to that pattern of teaching to which you were handed over.
18 Yes, since you were set free from sin, you became slaves to righteousness.
19 I am speaking in human terms because of the weakness of your flesh; for just as you presented your members as slaves to uncleanness and lawlessness leading to lawlessness, so now present your members as slaves to righteousness leading to holiness.
20 For when you were slaves of sin, you were free as to righteousness.
21 What, then, was the fruit that you used to produce at that time? Things of which you are now ashamed. For the end of those things is death.
22 However, now that you were set free from sin and became slaves to God, you are producing your fruit in the way of holiness, and the end is everlasting life.
23 For the wages sin pays is death, but the gift God gives is everlasting life by Christ Jesus our Lord.
7 Can it be that you do not know, brothers, (for I am speaking to those who know law) that the Law is master over a man as long as he lives?
2 For instance, a married woman is bound by law to her husband while he is alive; but if her husband dies, she is released from the law of her husband.
3 So, then, while her husband is living, she would be called an adulteress if she became another man’s. But if her husband dies, she is free from his law, so that she is not an adulteress if she becomes another man’s.
4 So, my brothers, you also were made dead to the Law through the body of the Christ, that you might become another’s, the one who was raised up from the dead, so that we should bear fruit to God.
5 For when we were living according to the flesh, the sinful passions that were awakened by the Law were at work in our bodies to produce fruit for death.
6 But now we have been released from the Law, because we have died to that which restrained us, in order that we might be slaves in a new sense by the spirit and not in the old sense by the written code.
7 What, then, are we to say? Is the Law sin? Certainly not! Really, I would not have come to know sin had it not been for the Law. For example, I would not have known covetousness if the Law had not said: “You must not covet.”
8 But sin, finding the opportunity afforded by the commandment, worked out in me covetousness of every sort, for apart from law sin was dead.
9 In fact, I was once alive apart from law. But when the commandment arrived, sin came to life again, but I died.
10 And the commandment that was to lead to life, this I found led to death.
11 For sin, finding the opportunity afforded by the commandment, seduced me and killed me through it.
12 So the Law in itself is holy, and the commandment is holy and righteous and good.
13 Therefore, did what is good result in my death? Certainly not! But sin did, that it might be shown to be sin working out death in me through what is good, so that through the commandment sin might become far more sinful.
14 For we know that the Law is spiritual, but I am fleshly, sold under sin.
15 For I do not understand what I am doing. For I do not practice what I wish, but I do what I hate.
16 However, if I do what I do not wish, I agree that the Law is fine.
17 But now I am no longer the one doing it, but it is the sin that resides in me.
18 For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, there dwells nothing good; for I have the desire to do what is fine but not the ability to carry it out.
19 For I do not do the good that I wish, but the bad that I do not wish is what I practice.
20 If, then, I do what I do not wish, I am no longer the one carrying it out, but it is the sin dwelling in me.
21 I find, then, this law in my case: When I wish to do what is right, what is bad is present with me.
22 I really delight in the law of God according to the man I am within,
23 but I see in my body another law warring against the law of my mind and leading me captive to sin’s law that is in my body.
24 Miserable man that I am! Who will rescue me from the body undergoing this death?
25 Thanks to God through Jesus Christ our Lord! So, then, with my mind I myself am a slave to God’s law, but with my flesh to sin’s law.
8 Therefore, those in union with Christ Jesus have no condemnation.
2 For the law of the spirit that gives life in union with Christ Jesus has set you free from the law of sin and of death.
3 What the Law was incapable of doing because it was weak through the flesh, God did by sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and concerning sin, condemning sin in the flesh,
4 so that the righteous requirement of the Law might be fulfilled in us who walk, not according to the flesh, but according to the spirit.
5 For those who live according to the flesh set their minds on the things of the flesh, but those who live according to the spirit, on the things of the spirit.
6 For setting the mind on the flesh means death, but setting the mind on the spirit means life and peace;
7 because setting the mind on the flesh means enmity with God, for it is not in subjection to the law of God, nor, in fact, can it be.
8 So those who are in harmony with the flesh cannot please God.
9 However, you are in harmony, not with the flesh, but with the spirit, if God’s spirit truly dwells in you. But if anyone does not have Christ’s spirit, this person does not belong to him.
10 But if Christ is in union with you, the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is life because of righteousness.
11 If, now, the spirit of him who raised up Jesus from the dead dwells in you, the one who raised up Christ Jesus from the dead will also make your mortal bodies alive through his spirit that resides in you.
12 So, then, brothers, we are under obligation, not to the flesh to live according to the flesh;
13 for if you live according to the flesh, you are sure to die; but if you put the practices of the body to death by the spirit, you will live.
14 For all who are led by God’s spirit are indeed God’s sons.
15 For you did not receive a spirit of slavery causing fear again, but you received a spirit of adoption as sons, by which spirit we cry out: “Abba, Father!”
16 The spirit itself bears witness with our spirit that we are God’s children.
17 If, then, we are children, we are also heirs—heirs indeed of God, but joint heirs with Christ—provided we suffer together so that we may also be glorified together.
18 For I consider that the sufferings of the present time do not amount to anything in comparison with the glory that is going to be revealed in us.
19 For the creation is waiting with eager expectation for the revealing of the sons of God.
20 For the creation was subjected to futility, not by its own will, but through the one who subjected it, on the basis of hope
21 that the creation itself will also be set free from enslavement to corruption and have the glorious freedom of the children of God.
22 For we know that all creation keeps on groaning together and being in pain together until now.
23 Not only that, but we ourselves also who have the firstfruits, namely, the spirit, yes, we ourselves groan within ourselves while we are earnestly waiting for adoption as sons, the release from our bodies by ransom.
24 For we were saved in this hope; but hope that is seen is not hope, for when a man sees a thing, does he hope for it?
25 But if we hope for what we do not see, we keep eagerly waiting for it with endurance.
26 In like manner, the spirit also joins in with help for our weakness; for the problem is that we do not know what we should pray for as we need to, but the spirit itself pleads for us with unuttered groanings.
27 But the one who searches the hearts knows what the meaning of the spirit is, because it is pleading in harmony with God for the holy ones.
28 We know that God makes all his works cooperate together for the good of those who love God, those who are the ones called according to his purpose;
29 because those whom he gave his first recognition he also foreordained to be patterned after the image of his Son, so that he might be the firstborn among many brothers.
30 Moreover, those whom he foreordained are the ones he also called; and those whom he called are the ones he also declared to be righteous. Finally those whom he declared righteous are the ones he also glorified.
31 What, then, are we to say about these things? If God is for us, who will be against us?
32 Since he did not even spare his own Son but handed him over for us all, will he not also, along with him, kindly give us all other things?
33 Who will file accusation against God’s chosen ones? God is the One who declares them righteous.
34 Who will condemn them? Christ Jesus is the one who died, yes, more than that the one who was raised up, who is at the right hand of God and who also pleads for us.
35 Who will separate us from the love of the Christ? Will tribulation or distress or persecution or hunger or nakedness or danger or sword?
36 Just as it is written: “For your sake we are being put to death all day long; we have been accounted as sheep for slaughtering.”
37 On the contrary, in all these things we are coming off completely victorious through the one who loved us.
38 For I am convinced that neither death nor life nor angels nor governments nor things now here nor things to come nor powers
39 nor height nor depth nor any other creation will be able to separate us from God’s love that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
9 I am telling the truth in Christ; I am not lying, as my conscience bears witness with me in holy spirit,
2 that I have great grief and unceasing pain in my heart.
3 For I could wish that I myself were separated from the Christ as the cursed one for the sake of my brothers, my relatives according to the flesh,
4 who are Israelites. To them belong the adoption as sons and the glory and the covenants and the giving of the Law and the sacred service and the promises.
5 To them the forefathers belong, and from them the Christ descended according to the flesh. God, who is over all, be praised forever. Amen.
6 However, it is not as though the word of God has failed. For not all who descend from Israel are really “Israel.”
7 Neither are they all children because they are Abraham’s offspring; rather, “What will be called your offspring will be through Isaac.”
8 That is, the children in the flesh are not really the children of God, but the children by the promise are counted as the offspring.
9 For the word of promise was as follows: “At this time I will come and Sarah will have a son.”
10 Not only then but also when Re·bekʹah conceived twins from the one man, Isaac our forefather;
11 for when they had not yet been born and had not practiced anything good or bad, so that God’s purpose respecting the choosing might continue dependent, not on works, but on the One who calls,
12 it was said to her: “The older will be the slave of the younger.”
13 Just as it is written: “I loved Jacob, but Eʹsau I hated.”
14 What are we to say, then? Is there injustice with God? Certainly not!
15 For he says to Moses: “I will show mercy to whomever I will show mercy, and I will show compassion to whomever I will show compassion.”
16 So, then, it depends, not on a person’s desire or on his effort, but on God, who has mercy.
17 For the scripture says to Pharʹaoh: “For this very reason I have let you remain: to show my power in connection with you and to have my name declared in all the earth.”
18 So, then, he has mercy on whomever he wishes, but he lets whomever he wishes become obstinate.
19 You will therefore say to me: “Why does he still find fault? For who has withstood his will?”
20 But who are you, O man, to be answering back to God? Does the thing molded say to its molder: “Why did you make me this way?”
21 What? Does not the potter have authority over the clay to make from the same lump one vessel for an honorable use, another for a dishonorable use?
22 What, then, if God had the will to demonstrate his wrath and to make his power known, and he tolerated with much patience vessels of wrath made fit for destruction?
23 And if this was done to make known the riches of his glory on vessels of mercy, which he prepared beforehand for glory,
24 namely, us, whom he called not only from among Jews but also from among nations, what of it?
25 It is as he says also in Ho·seʹa: “Those not my people I will call ‘my people,’ and her who was not loved, ‘beloved’;
26 and in the place where it was said to them, ‘You are not my people,’ there they will be called ‘sons of the living God.’”
27 Moreover, Isaiah cries out concerning Israel: “Although the number of the sons of Israel may be as the sand of the sea, only the remnant will be saved.
28 For Jehovah will make an accounting on the earth, concluding it and cutting it short.”
29 Also, just as Isaiah foretold: “Unless Jehovah of armies had left an offspring to us, we should have become just like Sodʹom, and we should have resembled Go·morʹrah.”
30 What are we to say, then? That people of the nations, although not pursuing righteousness, attained righteousness, the righteousness that results from faith;
31 but Israel, although pursuing a law of righteousness, did not attain to that law.
32 For what reason? Because they pursued it, not by faith, but as by works. They stumbled over the “stone of stumbling”;
33 as it is written: “Look! I am laying in Zion a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense, but the one who rests his faith on it will not be disappointed.”
10 Brothers, the goodwill of my heart and my supplication to God for them are indeed for their salvation.
2 For I bear them witness that they have a zeal for God, but not according to accurate knowledge.
3 For because of not knowing the righteousness of God but seeking to establish their own, they did not subject themselves to the righteousness of God.
4 For Christ is the end of the Law, so that everyone exercising faith may have righteousness.
5 For Moses writes about the righteousness that is by the Law: “The man who does these things will live by means of them.”
6 But the righteousness resulting from faith says: “Do not say in your heart, ‘Who will ascend into heaven?’ that is, to bring Christ down,
7 or, ‘Who will descend into the abyss?’ that is, to bring Christ up from the dead.”
8 But what does it say? “The word is near you, in your own mouth and in your own heart”; that is, “the word” of faith, which we are preaching.
9 For if you publicly declare with your mouth that Jesus is Lord, and exercise faith in your heart that God raised him up from the dead, you will be saved.
10 For with the heart one exercises faith for righteousness, but with the mouth one makes public declaration for salvation.
11 For the scripture says: “No one who rests his faith on him will be disappointed.”
12 For there is no distinction between Jew and Greek. There is the same Lord over all, who is rich toward all those calling on him.
13 For “everyone who calls on the name of Jehovah will be saved.”
14 However, how will they call on him if they have not put faith in him? How, in turn, will they put faith in him about whom they have not heard? How, in turn, will they hear without someone to preach?
15 How, in turn, will they preach unless they have been sent out? Just as it is written: “How beautiful are the feet of those who declare good news of good things!”
16 Nevertheless, they did not all obey the good news. For Isaiah says: “Jehovah, who has put faith in the thing heard from us?”
17 So faith follows the thing heard. In turn, what is heard is through the word about Christ.
18 But I ask, They did not fail to hear, did they? Why, in fact, “into all the earth their sound went out, and to the ends of the inhabited earth their message.”
19 But I ask, Israel did not fail to know, did they? First Moses says: “I will incite you to jealousy through that which is not a nation; I will incite you to violent anger through a foolish nation.”
20 But Isaiah becomes very bold and says: “I was found by those who were not seeking me; I became known to those who were not asking for me.”
21 But he says regarding Israel: “All day long I have spread out my hands toward a disobedient and obstinate people.”
11 I ask, then, God did not reject his people, did he? By no means! For I too am an Israelite, of the offspring of Abraham, from the tribe of Benjamin.
2 God did not reject his people, whom he first recognized. Do you not know what the scripture says in connection with E·liʹjah, as he pleads with God against Israel?
3 “Jehovah, they have killed your prophets, they have dug up your altars, and I alone am left, and now they are trying to take my life.”
4 Yet, what does the divine pronouncement say to him? “I have left for myself 7,000 men who have not bent the knee to Baʹal.”
5 So in the same way, at the present time also, there is a remnant according to a choosing through undeserved kindness.
6 Now if it is by undeserved kindness, it is no longer through works; otherwise, the undeserved kindness would no longer be undeserved kindness.
7 What, then? The very thing Israel is earnestly seeking he did not obtain, but the ones chosen obtained it. The rest had their senses dulled,
8 just as it is written: “God has given them a spirit of deep sleep, eyes that do not see and ears that do not hear, down to this very day.”
9 Also, David says: “Let their table become a snare and a trap and a stumbling block and a retribution for them.
10 Let their eyes become darkened so that they cannot see, and always make them bend their backs.”
11 So I ask, They did not stumble and fall completely, did they? Certainly not! But by their false step, there is salvation to people of the nations, to incite them to jealousy.
12 Now if their false step means riches to the world and their decrease means riches to people of the nations, how much more will their full number mean!
13 Now I speak to you who are people of the nations. Seeing that I am an apostle to the nations, I glorify my ministry
14 to see if I may in some way incite my own people to jealousy and save some from among them.
15 For if their being cast away means reconciliation for the world, what will the acceptance of them mean but life from the dead?
16 Further, if the part of the dough taken as firstfruits is holy, the entire batch is also holy; and if the root is holy, the branches are also.
17 However, if some of the branches were broken off and you, although being a wild olive, were grafted in among them and became a sharer of the richness of the olive’s root,
18 do not be arrogant toward the branches. If, though, you are arrogant toward them, remember that it is not you who bears the root, but the root bears you.
19 You will say, then: “Branches were broken off so that I might be grafted in.”
20 That is true! For their lack of faith, they were broken off, but you are standing by faith. Do not be haughty, but be in fear.
21 For if God did not spare the natural branches, neither will he spare you.
22 Consider, therefore, God’s kindness and severity. There is severity toward those who fell, but toward you there is God’s kindness, provided you remain in his kindness; otherwise, you too will be lopped off.
23 And they also, if they do not remain in their lack of faith, will be grafted in, for God is able to graft them back in.
24 For if you were cut out of the olive tree that is wild by nature and were grafted contrary to nature into the garden olive tree, how much more will these who are natural branches be grafted back into their own olive tree!
25 For I do not want you to be unaware of this sacred secret, brothers, so that you do not become wise in your own eyes: A partial dulling of senses has come upon Israel until the full number of people of the nations has come in,
26 and in this manner all Israel will be saved. Just as it is written: “The deliverer will come out of Zion and turn away ungodly practices from Jacob.
27 And this is my covenant with them, when I take their sins away.”
28 True, with respect to the good news, they are enemies for your sakes; but with respect to God’s choosing, they are beloved for the sake of their forefathers.
29 For the gifts and the calling of God are not things he will regret.
30 For just as you were once disobedient to God but have now been shown mercy because of their disobedience,
31 so also these now have been disobedient with mercy resulting to you, so that they themselves may also now be shown mercy.
32 For God has confined all of them together in disobedience so that he might show all of them mercy.
33 O the depth of God’s riches and wisdom and knowledge! How unsearchable his judgments are and beyond tracing out his ways are!
34 For “who has come to know Jehovah’s mind, or who has become his adviser?”
35 Or, “who has first given to him, so that it must be repaid to him?”
36 Because from him and by him and for him are all things. To him be the glory forever. Amen.
12 Therefore, I appeal to you by the compassions of God, brothers, to present your bodies as a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, a sacred service with your power of reason.
2 And stop being molded by this system of things, but be transformed by making your mind over, so that you may prove to yourselves the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.
3 For through the undeserved kindness given to me, I tell everyone there among you not to think more of himself than it is necessary to think, but to think so as to have a sound mind, each one as God has given to him a measure of faith.
4 For just as we have in one body many members, but the members do not all have the same function,
5 so we, although many, are one body in union with Christ, but individually we are members belonging to one another.
6 Since, then, we have gifts that differ according to the undeserved kindness given to us, if it is of prophecy, let us prophesy in proportion to our faith;
7 or if it is a ministry, let us be at this ministry; or the one who teaches, let him be at his teaching;
8 or the one who encourages, let him give encouragement; the one who distributes, let him do it liberally; the one who presides, let him do it diligently; the one who shows mercy, let him do it cheerfully.
9 Let your love be without hypocrisy. Abhor what is wicked; cling to what is good.
10 In brotherly love have tender affection for one another. In showing honor to one another, take the lead.
11 Be industrious, not lazy. Be aglow with the spirit. Slave for Jehovah.
12 Rejoice in the hope. Endure under tribulation. Persevere in prayer.
13 Share with the holy ones according to their needs. Follow the course of hospitality.
14 Keep on blessing those who persecute; bless and do not curse.
15 Rejoice with those who rejoice; weep with those who weep.
16 Have the same attitude toward others as toward yourselves; do not set your mind on lofty things, but be led along with the lowly things. Do not become wise in your own eyes.
17 Return evil for evil to no one. Take into consideration what is fine from the viewpoint of all men.
18 If possible, as far as it depends on you, be peaceable with all men.
19 Do not avenge yourselves, beloved, but yield place to the wrath; for it is written: “‘Vengeance is mine; I will repay,’ says Jehovah.”
20 But “if your enemy is hungry, feed him; if he is thirsty, give him something to drink; for by doing this you will heap fiery coals on his head.”
21 Do not let yourself be conquered by the evil, but keep conquering the evil with the good.
13 Let every person be in subjection to the superior authorities, for there is no authority except by God; the existing authorities stand placed in their relative positions by God.
2 Therefore, whoever opposes the authority has taken a stand against the arrangement of God; those who have taken a stand against it will bring judgment against themselves.
3 For those rulers are an object of fear, not to the good deed, but to the bad. Do you want to be free of fear of the authority? Keep doing good, and you will have praise from it;
4 for it is God’s minister to you for your good. But if you are doing what is bad, be in fear, for it is not without purpose that it bears the sword. It is God’s minister, an avenger to express wrath against the one practicing what is bad.
5 There is therefore compelling reason for you to be in subjection, not only on account of that wrath but also on account of your conscience.
6 That is why you are also paying taxes; for they are God’s public servants constantly serving this very purpose.
7 Render to all their dues: to the one who calls for the tax, the tax; to the one who calls for the tribute, the tribute; to the one who calls for fear, such fear; to the one who calls for honor, such honor.
8 Do not owe anything to anyone except to love one another; for whoever loves his fellow man has fulfilled the law.
9 For the law code, “You must not commit adultery, you must not murder, you must not steal, you must not covet,” and whatever other commandment there is, is summed up in this saying: “You must love your neighbor as yourself.”
10 Love does not work evil to one’s neighbor; therefore, love is the law’s fulfillment.
11 And do this because you know the season, that it is already the hour for you to awake from sleep, for now our salvation is nearer than at the time when we became believers.
12 The night is well along; the day has drawn near. Let us therefore throw off the works belonging to darkness and let us put on the weapons of the light.
13 Let us walk decently as in the daytime, not in wild parties and drunkenness, not in immoral intercourse and brazen conduct, not in strife and jealousy.
14 But put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and do not be planning ahead for the desires of the flesh.
14 Welcome the man having weaknesses in his faith, but do not pass judgment on differing opinions.
2 One man has faith to eat everything, but the man who is weak eats only vegetables.
3 Let the one eating not look down on the one not eating, and let the one not eating not judge the one eating, for God has welcomed him.
4 Who are you to judge the servant of another? To his own master he stands or falls. Indeed, he will be made to stand, for Jehovah can make him stand.
5 One man judges one day as above another; another judges one day the same as all others; let each one be fully convinced in his own mind.
6 The one who observes the day observes it to Jehovah. Also, the one who eats, eats to Jehovah, for he gives thanks to God; and the one who does not eat does not eat to Jehovah, and yet gives thanks to God.
7 Not one of us, in fact, lives with regard to himself only, and no one dies with regard to himself only.
8 For if we live, we live to Jehovah, and if we die, we die to Jehovah. So both if we live and if we die, we belong to Jehovah.
9 For to this end Christ died and came to life again, so that he might be Lord over both the dead and the living.
10 But why do you judge your brother? Or why do you also look down on your brother? For we will all stand before the judgment seat of God.
11 For it is written: “‘As surely as I live,’ says Jehovah, ‘to me every knee will bend, and every tongue will make open acknowledgment to God.’”
12 So, then, each of us will render an account for himself to God.
13 Therefore, let us not judge one another any longer but, rather, be determined not to put a stumbling block or an obstacle before a brother.
14 I know and am convinced in the Lord Jesus that nothing is unclean in itself; only where a man considers something to be unclean, to him it is unclean.
15 For if your brother is being offended because of food, you are no longer walking according to love. Do not by your food ruin that one for whom Christ died.
16 Therefore, do not let the good you do be spoken of as bad.
17 For the Kingdom of God does not mean eating and drinking, but means righteousness and peace and joy with holy spirit.
18 For whoever slaves for Christ in this way is acceptable to God and has approval with men.
19 So, then, let us pursue the things making for peace and the things that build one another up.
20 Stop tearing down the work of God just for the sake of food. True, all things are clean, but it is detrimental for a man to eat when it will cause stumbling.
21 It is best not to eat meat or drink wine or do anything over which your brother stumbles.
22 The faith that you have, keep it to yourself before God. Happy is the man who does not judge himself by what he approves.
23 But if he has doubts, he is already condemned if he eats, because he does not eat based on faith. Indeed, everything that is not based on faith is sin.
15 We, though, who are strong ought to bear the weaknesses of those not strong, and not to be pleasing ourselves.
2 Let each of us please his neighbor for his good, to build him up.
3 For even the Christ did not please himself, but just as it is written: “The reproaches of those reproaching you have fallen upon me.”
4 For all the things that were written beforehand were written for our instruction, so that through our endurance and through the comfort from the Scriptures we might have hope.
5 Now may the God who supplies endurance and comfort grant you to have among yourselves the same mental attitude that Christ Jesus had,
6 so that unitedly you may with one voice glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
7 So welcome one another, just as the Christ also welcomed you, with glory to God in view.
8 For I tell you that Christ became a minister of those who are circumcised in behalf of God’s truthfulness, so as to verify the promises He made to their forefathers,
9 and that the nations might glorify God for his mercy. Just as it is written: “That is why I will openly acknowledge you among the nations, and to your name I will sing praises.”
10 And again he says: “Be glad, you nations, with his people.”
11 And again: “Praise Jehovah, all you nations, and let all the peoples praise him.”
12 And again Isaiah says: “There will be the root of Jesʹse, the one arising to rule nations; on him nations will rest their hope.”
13 May the God who gives hope fill you with all joy and peace by your trusting in him, so that you may abound in hope with power of holy spirit.
14 Now I myself am convinced about you, my brothers, that you yourselves are also full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, and that you are able to admonish one another.
15 However, I have written to you more outspokenly on some points, so as to give you another reminder, because of the undeserved kindness given to me from God
16 for me to be a public servant of Christ Jesus to the nations. I am engaging in the holy work of the good news of God, so that these nations might be an acceptable offering, sanctified with holy spirit.
17 So I have reason to exult in Christ Jesus over the things pertaining to God.
18 For I will not presume to speak about anything except what Christ has done through me in order for the nations to be obedient, by my word and deed,
19 with the power of signs and wonders, with the power of God’s spirit, so that from Jerusalem and in a circuit as far as Il·lyrʹi·cum I have thoroughly preached the good news about the Christ.
20 In this way, indeed, I made it my aim not to declare the good news where the name of Christ had already been made known, so as not to build on another man’s foundation;
21 but just as it is written: “Those who received no report about him will see, and those who have not heard will understand.”
22 This is also why I was many times hindered from coming to you.
23 But now I no longer have untouched territory in these regions, and for many years I have longed to come to you.
24 Therefore, when I journey to Spain, I hope that I will see you and be accompanied partway there by you after I have first enjoyed your company for a time.
25 But now I am about to travel to Jerusalem to minister to the holy ones.
26 For those in Mac·e·doʹni·a and A·chaʹia have been pleased to share their things by a contribution to the poor among the holy ones in Jerusalem.
27 True, they have been pleased to do so, and indeed they were debtors to them; for if the nations have shared in their spiritual things, they also owe it to minister to them with their material things.
28 So after I have finished with this and have delivered this contribution securely to them, I will depart by way of you for Spain.
29 Moreover, I know that when I do come to you, I will come with a full measure of blessing from Christ.
30 Now I urge you, brothers, through our Lord Jesus Christ and through the love of the spirit, that you exert yourselves with me in prayers to God for me,
31 that I may be rescued from the unbelievers in Ju·deʹa and that my ministry in behalf of Jerusalem may prove to be acceptable to the holy ones,
32 so that by God’s will I will come to you with joy and be refreshed together with you.
33 May the God who gives peace be with all of you. Amen.
16 I am introducing to you Phoeʹbe, our sister, who is a minister of the congregation that is in Cenʹchre·ae,
2 so that you may welcome her in the Lord in a way worthy of the holy ones and give her whatever help she may need, for she herself also proved to be a defender of many, including me.
3 Give my greetings to Prisʹca and Aqʹui·la, my fellow workers in Christ Jesus,
4 who have risked their own necks for me and to whom not only I but also all the congregations of the nations give thanks.
5 Also greet the congregation that is in their house. Greet my beloved E·paeʹne·tus, who is a firstfruits of Asia for Christ.
6 Greet Mary, who has worked hard for you.
7 Greet An·dronʹi·cus and Juʹni·as, my relatives and fellow prisoners, who are men well-known to the apostles and who have been in union with Christ longer than I have.
8 Give my greetings to Am·pli·aʹtus, my beloved in the Lord.
9 Greet Ur·baʹnus, our fellow worker in Christ, and my beloved Staʹchys.
10 Greet A·pelʹles, the approved one in Christ. Greet those from the household of A·ris·tobʹu·lus.
11 Greet He·roʹdi·on, my relative. Greet those from the household of Nar·cisʹsus who are in the Lord.
12 Greet Try·phaeʹna and Try·phoʹsa, women who are working hard in the Lord. Greet Perʹsis, our beloved one, for she has worked hard in the Lord.
13 Greet Ruʹfus, the chosen one in the Lord, and his mother and mine.
14 Greet A·synʹcri·tus, Phleʹgon, Herʹmes, Patʹro·bas, Herʹmas, and the brothers with them.
15 Greet Phi·lolʹo·gus and Julia, Neʹreus and his sister, and O·lymʹpas, and all the holy ones with them.
16 Greet one another with a holy kiss. All the congregations of the Christ greet you.
17 Now I urge you, brothers, to keep your eye on those who create divisions and causes for stumbling contrary to the teaching that you have learned, and avoid them.
18 For men of that sort are slaves, not of our Lord Christ, but of their own appetites, and by smooth talk and flattering speech they seduce the hearts of unsuspecting ones.
19 Your obedience has come to the notice of all, and so I rejoice over you. But I want you to be wise as to what is good, but innocent as to what is evil.
20 For his part, the God who gives peace will crush Satan under your feet shortly. May the undeserved kindness of our Lord Jesus be with you.
21 Timothy, my fellow worker, greets you, and so do Lucius, Jaʹson, and So·sipʹa·ter, my relatives.
22 I, Terʹtius, who have done the writing of this letter, greet you in the Lord.
23 Gaʹius, host to me and to all the congregation, greets you. E·rasʹtus, the city treasurer, greets you, and so does Quarʹtus, his brother.
25 Now to Him who can make you firm according to the good news I declare and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the sacred secret that has been kept in silence for long-lasting times
26 but has now been made manifest and has been made known through the prophetic Scriptures among all the nations according to the command of the everlasting God to promote obedience by faith;
27 to God, who alone is wise, be the glory through Jesus Christ forever. Amen.
1 Paul, called to be an apostle of Christ Jesus by God’s will, and Sosʹthe·nes our brother,
2 to the congregation of God that is in Corinth, to you who have been sanctified in union with Christ Jesus, called to be holy ones, together with all those everywhere who are calling on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, their Lord and ours:
3 May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
4 I always thank my God for you in view of the undeserved kindness of God given to you in Christ Jesus;
5 because in everything you have been enriched in him, in full ability to speak and in full knowledge,
6 just as the witness about the Christ has been made firm among you,
7 so that you do not lack in any gift at all, while you are eagerly waiting for the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ.
8 He will also make you firm to the end so that you may be open to no accusation in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
9 God is faithful, by whom you were called into fellowship with his Son, Jesus Christ our Lord.
10 Now I urge you, brothers, through the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you should all speak in agreement and that there should be no divisions among you, but that you may be completely united in the same mind and in the same line of thought.
11 For some from the house of Chloʹe have informed me regarding you, my brothers, that there are dissensions among you.
12 What I mean is this, that each one of you says: “I belong to Paul,” “But I to A·polʹlos,” “But I to Ceʹphas,” “But I to Christ.”
13 Is the Christ divided? Paul was not executed on the stake for you, was he? Or were you baptized in the name of Paul?
14 I thank God that I baptized none of you except Crisʹpus and Gaʹius,
15 so that no one may say that you were baptized in my name.
16 Yes, I also baptized the household of Stephʹa·nas. As for the rest, I do not know whether I baptized anyone else.
17 For Christ sent me, not to baptize, but to declare the good news; and not with wisdom of speech, so that the torture stake of the Christ should not be made useless.
18 For the speech about the torture stake is foolishness to those who are perishing, but to us who are being saved, it is God’s power.
19 For it is written: “I will make the wisdom of the wise men perish, and the intelligence of the intellectuals I will reject.”
20 Where is the wise man? Where is the scribe? Where is the debater of this system of things? Has not God made the wisdom of the world foolish?
21 For since, in the wisdom of God, the world did not get to know God through its wisdom, God was pleased through the foolishness of what is preached to save those believing.
22 For the Jews ask for signs and the Greeks look for wisdom;
23 but we preach Christ executed on the stake, to the Jews a cause for stumbling but to the nations foolishness.
24 However, to those who are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ is the power of God and the wisdom of God.
25 Because a foolish thing of God is wiser than men, and a weak thing of God is stronger than men.
26 For you see his calling of you, brothers, that there are not many wise in a fleshly way, not many powerful, not many of noble birth,
27 but God chose the foolish things of the world to put the wise men to shame; and God chose the weak things of the world to put the strong things to shame;
28 and God chose the insignificant things of the world and the things looked down on, the things that are not, to bring to nothing the things that are,
29 so that no one might boast in the sight of God.
30 But it is due to him that you are in union with Christ Jesus, who has become to us wisdom from God, also righteousness and sanctification and release by ransom,
31 so that it may be just as it is written: “The one who boasts, let him boast in Jehovah.”
2 So when I came to you, brothers, I did not come with extravagant speech or wisdom declaring the sacred secret of God to you.
2 For I decided not to know anything among you except Jesus Christ, and him executed on the stake.
3 And I came to you in weakness and in fear and with much trembling;
4 and my speech and what I preached were not with persuasive words of wisdom but with a demonstration of spirit and power,
5 so that your faith might be, not in men’s wisdom, but in God’s power.
6 Now we speak wisdom among those who are mature, but not the wisdom of this system of things nor that of the rulers of this system of things, who are to come to nothing.
7 But we speak God’s wisdom in a sacred secret, the hidden wisdom, which God foreordained before the systems of things for our glory.
8 It is this wisdom that none of the rulers of this system of things came to know, for if they had known it, they would not have executed the glorious Lord.
9 But just as it is written: “Eye has not seen and ear has not heard, nor have there been conceived in the heart of man the things that God has prepared for those who love him.”
10 For it is to us God has revealed them through his spirit, for the spirit searches into all things, even the deep things of God.
11 For who among men knows the things of a man except the man’s spirit within him? So, too, no one has come to know the things of God except the spirit of God.
12 Now we received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit that is from God, so that we might know the things that have been kindly given us by God.
13 These things we also speak, not with words taught by human wisdom, but with those taught by the spirit, as we explain spiritual matters with spiritual words.
14 But a physical man does not accept the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him; and he cannot get to know them, because they are examined spiritually.
15 However, the spiritual man examines all things, but he himself is not examined by any man.
16 For “who has come to know the mind of Jehovah, so that he may instruct him?” But we do have the mind of Christ.
3 So, brothers, I was not able to speak to you as to spiritual men, but as to fleshly men, as to infants in Christ.
2 I fed you milk, not solid food, for you were not yet strong enough. In fact, neither are you strong enough now,
3 for you are still fleshly. Since there are jealousy and strife among you, are you not fleshly and are you not walking as men do?
4 For when one says, “I belong to Paul,” but another says, “I to A·polʹlos,” are you not acting like mere men?
5 What, then, is A·polʹlos? Yes, what is Paul? Ministers through whom you became believers, just as the Lord granted each one.
6 I planted, A·polʹlos watered, but God kept making it grow,
7 so that neither is the one who plants anything nor is the one who waters, but God who makes it grow.
8 Now the one who plants and the one who waters are one, but each person will receive his own reward according to his own work.
9 For we are God’s fellow workers. You are God’s field under cultivation, God’s building.
10 According to the undeserved kindness of God that was given to me, I laid a foundation as a skilled master builder, but someone else is building on it. But let each one keep watching how he is building on it.
11 For no one can lay any other foundation than what is laid, which is Jesus Christ.
12 Now if anyone builds on the foundation gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, or straw,
13 each one’s work will be shown for what it is, for the day will show it up, because it will be revealed by means of fire, and the fire itself will prove what sort of work each one has built.
14 If anyone’s work that he has built on it remains, he will receive a reward;
15 if anyone’s work is burned up, he will suffer loss, but he himself will be saved; yet, if so, it will be as through fire.
16 Do you not know that you yourselves are God’s temple and that the spirit of God dwells in you?
17 If anyone destroys the temple of God, God will destroy him; for the temple of God is holy, and you are that temple.
18 Let no one deceive himself: If anyone among you thinks he is wise in this system of things, let him become a fool, so that he may become wise.
19 For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God, for it is written: “He catches the wise in their own cunning.”
20 And again: “Jehovah knows that the reasonings of the wise men are futile.”
21 So let no one boast in men; for all things belong to you,
22 whether Paul or A·polʹlos or Ceʹphas or the world or life or death or things now here or things to come, all things belong to you;
23 in turn you belong to Christ; Christ, in turn, belongs to God.
4 A man should regard us as attendants of Christ and stewards of God’s sacred secrets.
2 In this regard, what is expected of stewards is that they be found faithful.
3 Now to me it is of very little importance to be examined by you or by a human tribunal. In fact, I do not even examine myself.
4 For I am not conscious of anything against myself. But by this I am not proved righteous; the one who examines me is Jehovah.
5 Therefore, do not judge anything before the due time, until the Lord comes. He will bring the secret things of darkness to light and make known the intentions of the hearts, and then each one will receive his praise from God.
6 Now, brothers, these things I have applied to myself and A·polʹlos for your good, that through us you may learn the rule: “Do not go beyond the things that are written,” so that you may not be puffed up with pride, favoring one against the other.
7 For who makes you different from another? Indeed, what do you have that you did not receive? If, in fact, you did receive it, why do you boast as though you did not receive it?
8 Are you already satisfied? Are you already rich? Have you begun ruling as kings without us? I really wish that you had begun ruling as kings, so that we also might rule with you as kings.
9 For it seems to me that God has put us the apostles last on exhibition as men condemned to death, because we have become a theatrical spectacle to the world, and to angels and to men.
10 We are fools because of Christ, but you are discreet in Christ; we are weak, but you are strong; you are held in honor, but we in dishonor.
11 Down to this very hour we continue to hunger and thirst and to be poorly clothed and to be beaten and to be homeless
12 and to toil, working with our own hands. When insulted, we bless; when persecuted, we patiently endure;
13 when slandered, we answer mildly; we have become as the refuse of the world, the offscouring of all things, until now.
14 I am writing these things, not to put you to shame, but to admonish you as my beloved children.
15 For though you may have 10,000 guardians in Christ, you certainly do not have many fathers; for in Christ Jesus, I have become your father through the good news.
16 I urge you, therefore, become imitators of me.
17 That is why I am sending Timothy to you, because he is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord. He will remind you of my methods in connection with Christ Jesus, just as I am teaching everywhere in every congregation.
18 Some are puffed up with pride, as though I were not coming to you.
19 But I will come to you shortly, if Jehovah wills, and I will get to know, not the speech of those who are puffed up with pride, but their power.
20 For the Kingdom of God is a matter not of speech but of power.
21 Which do you prefer? Shall I come to you with a rod or with love and mildness of spirit?
5 Actually sexual immorality is reported among you, and such immorality as is not even found among the nations—of a man living with his father’s wife.
2 And are you proud of it? Should you not rather mourn, so that the man who committed this deed should be taken away from your midst?
3 Although absent in body, I am present in spirit, and I have already judged the man who has done this, as if I were actually with you.
4 When you are gathered together in the name of our Lord Jesus, and knowing that I am with you in spirit along with the power of our Lord Jesus,
5 you must hand such a man over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, so that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord.
6 Your boasting is not good. Do you not know that a little leaven ferments the whole batch of dough?
7 Clear away the old leaven so that you may be a new batch, inasmuch as you are free from ferment. For, indeed, Christ our Passover lamb has been sacrificed.
8 So, then, let us keep the festival, not with old leaven, nor with leaven of badness and wickedness, but with unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
9 In my letter I wrote you to stop keeping company with sexually immoral people,
10 not meaning entirely with the sexually immoral people of this world or the greedy people or extortioners or idolaters. Otherwise, you would actually have to get out of the world.
11 But now I am writing you to stop keeping company with anyone called a brother who is sexually immoral or a greedy person or an idolater or a reviler or a drunkard or an extortioner, not even eating with such a man.
12 For what do I have to do with judging those outside? Do you not judge those inside,
13 while God judges those outside? “Remove the wicked person from among yourselves.”
6 Does any one of you who has a dispute with another dare to go to court before unrighteous men, and not before the holy ones?
2 Or do you not know that the holy ones will judge the world? And if the world is to be judged by you, are you not competent to try very trivial matters?
3 Do you not know that we will judge angels? Then why not matters of this life?
4 If, then, you do have matters of this life to be tried, is it the men looked down on in the congregation whom you assign as judges?
5 I am speaking to move you to shame. Is there not one wise man among you who is able to judge between his brothers?
6 Instead, brother goes to court against brother, and before unbelievers at that!
7 Really, it is already a defeat for you when you have lawsuits with one another. Why not rather let yourselves be wronged? Why do you not rather let yourselves be defrauded?
8 Instead, you wrong and defraud, and your brothers at that!
9 Or do you not know that unrighteous people will not inherit God’s Kingdom? Do not be misled. Those who are sexually immoral, idolaters, adulterers, men who submit to homosexual acts, men who practice homosexuality,
10 thieves, greedy people, drunkards, revilers, and extortioners will not inherit God’s Kingdom.
11 And yet that is what some of you were. But you have been washed clean; you have been sanctified; you have been declared righteous in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and with the spirit of our God.
12 All things are lawful for me, but not all things are advantageous. All things are lawful for me, but I will not let myself be controlled by anything.
13 Food is for the stomach and the stomach is for food, but God will bring both of them to nothing. The body is not for sexual immorality but for the Lord, and the Lord is for the body.
14 But God raised up the Lord and will also raise us up out of death through his power.
15 Do you not know that your bodies are members of Christ? Should I, then, take the members of the Christ away and join them to a prostitute? By no means!
16 Do you not know that anyone who is joined to a prostitute is one body with her? For “the two,” says he, “will be one flesh.”
17 But whoever is joined to the Lord is one with him in spirit.
18 Flee from sexual immorality! Every other sin that a man may commit is outside his body, but whoever practices sexual immorality is sinning against his own body.
19 Do you not know that your body is the temple of the holy spirit within you, which you have from God? Also, you do not belong to yourselves,
20 for you were bought with a price. By all means, glorify God in your body.
7 Now concerning the things about which you wrote, it is better for a man not to touch a woman;
2 but because of the prevalence of sexual immorality, let each man have his own wife and each woman have her own husband.
3 Let the husband give to his wife her due, and let the wife also do likewise to her husband.
4 The wife does not have authority over her own body, but her husband does; likewise, the husband does not have authority over his own body, but his wife does.
5 Do not deprive each other except by mutual consent for an appointed time, so that you may devote time to prayer and may come together again, in order that Satan may not keep tempting you for your lack of self-control.
6 However, I say this by way of concession, not as a command.
7 But I wish all men were as I am. Nevertheless, each one has his own gift from God, one in this way, another in that way.
8 Now I say to those who are unmarried and to the widows that it is better for them if they remain as I am.
9 But if they do not have self-control, let them marry, for it is better to marry than to be inflamed with passion.
10 To the married people I give instructions, not I but the Lord, that a wife should not separate from her husband.
11 But if she does separate, let her remain unmarried or else be reconciled with her husband; and a husband should not leave his wife.
12 But to the others I say, yes, I, not the Lord: If any brother has an unbelieving wife and she is agreeable to staying with him, let him not leave her;
13 and if a woman has an unbelieving husband and he is agreeable to staying with her, let her not leave her husband.
14 For the unbelieving husband is sanctified in relation to his wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified in relation to the brother; otherwise, your children would be unclean, but now they are holy.
15 But if the unbelieving one chooses to depart, let him depart; a brother or a sister is not bound under such circumstances, but God has called you to peace.
16 For wife, how do you know whether you will save your husband? Or, husband, how do you know whether you will save your wife?
17 Nevertheless, just as Jehovah has given each one a portion, let each one so walk as God has called him. And so I give this directive in all the congregations.
18 Was any man already circumcised when he was called? Let him not undo his circumcision. Has any man been called while uncircumcised? Let him not get circumcised.
19 Circumcision means nothing, and uncircumcision means nothing; what means something is the observing of God’s commandments.
20 In whatever state each one was called, let him remain in it.
21 Were you called when a slave? Do not let it concern you; but if you can become free, then seize the opportunity.
22 For anyone who was called in the Lord when a slave is the Lord’s freedman; likewise anyone who was called when a freeman is a slave of Christ.
23 You were bought with a price; stop becoming slaves of men.
24 In whatever state each one was called, brothers, let him remain in it before God.
25 Now concerning virgins, I have no command from the Lord, but I give my opinion as one who had mercy shown him by the Lord to be faithful.
26 Therefore, I think that it is best for a man to continue as he is in view of the present difficulty.
27 Are you bound to a wife? Stop seeking a release. Are you freed from a wife? Stop seeking a wife.
28 But even if you did marry, you would commit no sin. And if a virgin married, such a person would commit no sin. However, those who do will have tribulation in their flesh. But I am trying to spare you.
29 Moreover, this I say, brothers, the time left is reduced. From now on, let those who have wives be as though they had none,
30 and those who weep as those who do not weep, and those who rejoice as those who do not rejoice, and those who buy as those who do not possess,
31 and those making use of the world as those not using it to the full; for the scene of this world is changing.
32 Indeed, I want you to be free from anxiety. The unmarried man is anxious for the things of the Lord, how he may gain the Lord’s approval.
33 But the married man is anxious for the things of the world, how he may gain the approval of his wife,
34 and he is divided. Further, the unmarried woman, as well as the virgin, is anxious for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in her body and in her spirit. However, the married woman is anxious for the things of the world, how she may gain the approval of her husband.
35 But I am saying this for your personal advantage, not to restrict you, but to move you to what is appropriate and to constant devotion to the Lord without distraction.
36 But if anyone thinks he is behaving improperly by remaining unmarried, and if he is past the bloom of youth, then this is what should take place: Let him do what he wants; he does not sin. Let them marry.
37 But if anyone stands settled in his heart and has no necessity, but has authority over his own will and has made the decision in his own heart to remain unmarried, he will do well.
38 So also, whoever marries does well, but whoever does not marry will do better.
39 A wife is bound as long as her husband is alive. But if her husband should fall asleep in death, she is free to be married to whomever she wants, only in the Lord.
40 But in my opinion, she is happier if she remains as she is; and I certainly think I also have God’s spirit.
8 Now concerning food offered to idols: We know we all have knowledge. Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up.
2 If anyone thinks he knows something, he does not yet know it as he should know it.
3 But if anyone loves God, this one is known by him.
4 Now concerning the eating of food offered to idols, we know that an idol is nothing in the world and that there is no God but one.
5 For even though there are so-called gods, whether in heaven or on earth, just as there are many “gods” and many “lords,”
6 there is actually to us one God, the Father, from whom all things are and we for him; and there is one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom all things are and we through him.
7 However, not all have this knowledge. But some, because of their former association with the idol, eat food as something sacrificed to an idol, and their conscience, being weak, is defiled.
8 But food will not bring us nearer to God; we are no worse off if we do not eat, nor better off if we eat.
9 But keep watching that your right to choose does not somehow become a stumbling block to those who are weak.
10 For if anyone should see you who have knowledge having a meal in an idol temple, will not the conscience of that one who is weak be emboldened to the point of eating food offered to idols?
11 So by your knowledge the man who is weak is being ruined, your brother for whose sake Christ died.
12 When you sin against your brothers in this way and wound their weak conscience, you are sinning against Christ.
13 That is why if food makes my brother stumble, I will never again eat meat at all, so that I will not make my brother stumble.
9 Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Have I not seen Jesus our Lord? Are you not my work in the Lord?
2 Even if I am not an apostle to others, I most certainly am to you! For you are the seal confirming my apostleship in the Lord.
3 My defense to those who examine me is as follows:
4 We have the right to eat and drink, do we not?
5 We have the right to be accompanied by a believing wife, as the rest of the apostles and the Lord’s brothers and Ceʹphas, do we not?
6 Or is it only Barʹna·bas and I who do not have the right to refrain from working for a living?
7 What soldier ever serves at his own expense? Who plants a vineyard and does not eat of its fruit? Or who shepherds a flock and does not partake of some of the milk of the flock?
8 Am I saying these things from a human viewpoint? Or does not the Law also say these things?
9 For it is written in the Law of Moses: “You must not muzzle a bull when it is threshing out the grain.” Is it bulls that God is concerned about?
10 Or is it actually for our sakes that he says it? It was really written for our sakes, because the man who plows and the man who threshes ought to do so in the hope of receiving a share.
11 If we have sown spiritual things among you, is it too much if we reap material support from you?
12 If other men have this rightful claim over you, do we not have it much more so? Nevertheless, we have not made use of this right, but we are enduring all things so that we might not in any way hinder the good news about the Christ.
13 Do you not know that the men performing sacred duties eat the things of the temple, and that those regularly serving at the altar receive a share from the altar?
14 In this way, too, the Lord commanded for those proclaiming the good news to live by means of the good news.
15 But I have not made use of a single one of these provisions. Indeed, I have not written these things so that this would be done for me, for it would be better to die than—no man will take away my grounds for boasting!
16 Now if I am declaring the good news, it is no reason for me to boast, for necessity is laid upon me. Really, woe to me if I do not declare the good news!
17 If I do this willingly, I have a reward; but even if I do it against my will, I still have a stewardship entrusted to me.
18 What, then, is my reward? That when I declare the good news, I may offer the good news without cost, to avoid abusing my authority in the good news.
19 For though I am free from all people, I have made myself the slave to all, so that I may gain as many people as possible.
20 To the Jews I became as a Jew in order to gain Jews; to those under law I became as under law, though I myself am not under law, in order to gain those under law.
21 To those without law I became as without law, although I am not without law toward God but under law toward Christ, in order to gain those without law.
22 To the weak I became weak, in order to gain the weak. I have become all things to people of all sorts, so that I might by all possible means save some.
23 But I do all things for the sake of the good news, in order to share it with others.
24 Do you not know that the runners in a race all run, but only one receives the prize? Run in such a way that you may win it.
25 Now everyone competing in a contest exercises self-control in all things. Of course, they do it to receive a crown that can perish, but we, one that does not perish.
26 Therefore, the way I am running is not aimlessly; the way I am aiming my blows is so as not to be striking the air;
27 but I pummel my body and lead it as a slave, so that after I have preached to others, I myself should not become disapproved somehow.
10 Now I want you to know, brothers, that our forefathers were all under the cloud and all passed through the sea
2 and all got baptized into Moses by means of the cloud and of the sea,
3 and all ate the same spiritual food
4 and all drank the same spiritual drink. For they used to drink from the spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock meant the Christ.
5 Nevertheless, God was not pleased with most of them, for they were struck down in the wilderness.
6 Now these things became examples for us, in order for us not to desire injurious things, as they desired them.
7 Neither become idolaters, as some of them did; just as it is written: “The people sat down to eat and drink. Then they got up to have a good time.”
8 Neither let us practice sexual immorality, as some of them committed sexual immorality, only to fall, 23,000 of them in one day.
9 Neither let us put Jehovah to the test, as some of them put him to the test, only to perish by the serpents.
10 Neither be murmurers, as some of them murmured, only to perish by the destroyer.
11 Now these things happened to them as examples, and they were written for a warning to us upon whom the ends of the systems of things have come.
12 So let the one who thinks he is standing beware that he does not fall.
13 No temptation has come upon you except what is common to men. But God is faithful, and he will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear, but along with the temptation he will also make the way out so that you may be able to endure it.
14 Therefore, my beloved ones, flee from idolatry.
15 I speak as to men with discernment; judge for yourselves what I say.
16 The cup of blessing that we bless, is it not a sharing in the blood of the Christ? The loaf that we break, is it not a sharing in the body of the Christ?
17 Because there is one loaf, we, although many, are one body, for we are all partaking of that one loaf.
18 Look at Israel in the fleshly sense: Are not those who eat the sacrifices sharers with the altar?
19 What, then, am I saying? That what is sacrificed to an idol is anything, or that an idol is anything?
20 No; but I say that what the nations sacrifice, they sacrifice to demons and not to God; and I do not want you to become sharers with the demons.
21 You cannot be drinking the cup of Jehovah and the cup of demons; you cannot be partaking of “the table of Jehovah” and the table of demons.
22 Or ‘are we inciting Jehovah to jealousy’? We are not stronger than he is, are we?
23 All things are lawful, but not all things are advantageous. All things are lawful, but not all things build up.
24 Let each one keep seeking, not his own advantage, but that of the other person.
25 Eat whatever is sold in a meat market, making no inquiry because of your conscience,
26 for “to Jehovah belong the earth and everything in it.”
27 If an unbeliever invites you and you want to go, eat whatever is set before you, making no inquiry on account of your conscience.
28 But if anyone says to you, “This is something offered in sacrifice,” do not eat because of the one who told you and because of conscience.
29 I do not mean your own conscience, but that of the other person. For why should my freedom be judged by another person’s conscience?
30 If I am partaking with thanks, why am I to be spoken of abusively over that for which I give thanks?
31 Therefore, whether you are eating or drinking or doing anything else, do all things for God’s glory.
32 Keep from becoming causes for stumbling to Jews as well as Greeks and to the congregation of God,
33 just as I am trying to please all people in all things, not seeking my own advantage, but that of the many, so that they may be saved.
11 Become imitators of me, just as I am of Christ.
2 I commend you because in all things you remember me and you are holding fast the traditions just as I handed them on to you.
3 But I want you to know that the head of every man is the Christ; in turn, the head of a woman is the man; in turn, the head of the Christ is God.
4 Every man who prays or prophesies with something on his head shames his head;
5 but every woman who prays or prophesies with her head uncovered shames her head, for it is one and the same as if she were a woman with a shaved head.
6 For if a woman does not cover herself, she should have her hair cut off; but if it is disgraceful for a woman to have her hair cut off or shaved, she should be covered.
7 For a man should not have his head covered, as he is God’s image and glory, but the woman is man’s glory.
8 For man did not come from woman, but woman came from man.
9 And what is more, man was not created for the sake of the woman, but woman for the sake of the man.
10 That is why the woman ought to have a sign of authority on her head, because of the angels.
11 Besides, in connection with the Lord, neither is woman separate from man nor is man separate from woman.
12 For just as the woman is from the man, so also the man is through the woman; but all things are from God.
13 Judge for yourselves: Is it fitting for a woman to pray to God with her head uncovered?
14 Does not nature itself teach you that long hair is a dishonor to a man,
15 but if a woman has long hair, it is a glory to her? For her hair is given to her instead of a covering.
16 However, if anyone wants to argue in favor of some other custom, we have no other, nor do the congregations of God.
17 But while giving these instructions, I do not commend you, because it is, not for the better, but for the worse that you meet together.
18 For first of all, I hear that when you come together in a congregation, divisions exist among you; and to an extent I believe it.
19 For there will certainly also be sects among you, so that those of you who are approved may also become evident.
20 When you come together in one place, it is not really to eat the Lord’s Evening Meal.
21 For when you eat it, each one takes his own evening meal beforehand, so that one is hungry but another is intoxicated.
22 Do you not have houses for eating and drinking? Or do you despise the congregation of God and make those who have nothing feel ashamed? What can I say to you? Should I commend you? In this I do not commend you.
23 For I received from the Lord what I also handed on to you, that the Lord Jesus on the night on which he was going to be betrayed took a loaf,
24 and after giving thanks, he broke it and said: “This means my body, which is in your behalf. Keep doing this in remembrance of me.”
25 He did the same with the cup also, after they had the evening meal, saying: “This cup means the new covenant by virtue of my blood. Keep doing this, whenever you drink it, in remembrance of me.”
26 For whenever you eat this loaf and drink this cup, you keep proclaiming the death of the Lord, until he comes.
27 Therefore, whoever eats the loaf or drinks the cup of the Lord unworthily will be guilty respecting the body and the blood of the Lord.
28 First let a man approve himself after scrutiny, and only then let him eat of the loaf and drink of the cup.
29 For the one who eats and drinks without discerning the body eats and drinks judgment against himself.
30 That is why many among you are weak and sick, and quite a few are sleeping in death.
31 But if we would discern what we ourselves are, we would not be judged.
32 However, when we are judged, we are disciplined by Jehovah, so that we may not become condemned with the world.
33 Consequently, my brothers, when you come together to eat it, wait for one another.
34 If anyone is hungry, let him eat at home, so that when you come together it is not for judgment. But as for the remaining matters, I will put them in order when I get there.
12 Now concerning the spiritual gifts, brothers, I do not want you to be uninformed.
2 You know that when you were people of the nations, you were influenced and led astray to those voiceless idols, following wherever they might lead you.
3 Now I would have you know that nobody when speaking by God’s spirit says: “Jesus is accursed!” and nobody can say: “Jesus is Lord!” except by holy spirit.
4 Now there are different gifts, but there is the same spirit;
5 and there are different ministries, and yet there is the same Lord;
6 and there are different activities, and yet it is the same God who performs them all in everyone.
7 But the manifestation of the spirit is given to each one for a beneficial purpose.
8 For to one is given speech of wisdom through the spirit, to another speech of knowledge according to the same spirit,
9 to another faith by the same spirit, to another gifts of healing by that one spirit,
10 to yet another operations of powerful works, to another prophesying, to another discernment of inspired expressions, to another different tongues, and to another interpretation of tongues.
11 But all these operations are performed by the very same spirit, distributing to each one respectively just as it wills.
12 For just as the body is one but has many members, and all the members of that body, although many, are one body, so too is the Christ.
13 For by one spirit we were all baptized into one body, whether Jews or Greeks, whether slaves or free, and we were all made to drink one spirit.
14 For, indeed, the body is made up not of one member but of many.
15 If the foot should say, “Because I am not a hand, I am no part of the body,” that does not make it no part of the body.
16 And if the ear should say, “Because I am not an eye, I am no part of the body,” that does not make it no part of the body.
17 If the whole body were an eye, where would the sense of hearing be? If it were all hearing, where would the sense of smell be?
18 But now God has arranged each of the body members just as he pleased.
19 If they were all the same member, where would the body be?
20 But now they are many members, yet one body.
21 The eye cannot say to the hand, “I do not need you,” or again, the head cannot say to the feet, “I do not need you.”
22 On the contrary, the members of the body that seem to be weaker are necessary,
23 and the parts of the body that we think to be less honorable we surround with greater honor, so our unseemly parts are treated with greater modesty,
24 whereas our attractive parts do not need anything. Nevertheless, God has so composed the body, giving greater honor to the part that had a lack,
25 so that there should be no division in the body, but its members should have mutual concern for one another.
26 If one member suffers, all the other members suffer with it; or if a member is glorified, all the other members rejoice with it.
27 Now you are Christ’s body, and each of you individually is a member.
28 And God has assigned the respective ones in the congregation: first, apostles; second, prophets; third, teachers; then powerful works; then gifts of healings; helpful services; abilities to direct; different tongues.
29 Not all are apostles, are they? Not all are prophets, are they? Not all are teachers, are they? Not all perform powerful works, do they?
30 Not all have gifts of healings, do they? Not all speak in tongues, do they? Not all are interpreters, are they?
31 But keep striving for the greater gifts. And yet I will show you a surpassing way.
13 If I speak in the tongues of men and of angels but do not have love, I have become a clanging gong or a clashing cymbal.
2 And if I have the gift of prophecy and understand all the sacred secrets and all knowledge, and if I have all the faith so as to move mountains, but do not have love, I am nothing.
3 And if I give all my belongings to feed others, and if I hand over my body so that I may boast, but do not have love, I do not benefit at all.
4 Love is patient and kind. Love is not jealous. It does not brag, does not get puffed up,
5 does not behave indecently, does not look for its own interests, does not become provoked. It does not keep account of the injury.
6 It does not rejoice over unrighteousness, but rejoices with the truth.
7 It bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things.
8 Love never fails. But if there are gifts of prophecy, they will be done away with; if there are tongues, they will cease; if there is knowledge, it will be done away with.
9 For we have partial knowledge and we prophesy partially,
10 but when what is complete comes, what is partial will be done away with.
11 When I was a child, I used to speak as a child, to think as a child, to reason as a child; but now that I have become a man, I have done away with the traits of a child.
12 For now we see in hazy outline by means of a metal mirror, but then it will be face-to-face. At present I know partially, but then I will know accurately, just as I am accurately known.
13 Now, however, these three remain: faith, hope, love; but the greatest of these is love.
14 Pursue love, yet keep striving for the spiritual gifts, but preferably that you may prophesy.
2 For the one who speaks in a tongue speaks, not to men, but to God, for no one listens, but he speaks sacred secrets by the spirit.
3 However, the one who prophesies builds up and encourages and consoles men by his speech.
4 The one who speaks in a tongue builds up himself, but the one who prophesies builds up a congregation.
5 Now I would like for all of you to speak in tongues, but I prefer that you prophesy. Indeed, the one who prophesies is greater than the one who speaks in tongues, unless he interprets, so that the congregation may be built up.
6 But at this time, brothers, if I should come speaking to you in tongues, what good would I do you unless I spoke to you either with a revelation or with knowledge or with a prophecy or with a teaching?
7 It is the same with the inanimate things that produce sound, whether a flute or a harp. Unless there is an interval to the tones, how can what is being played on the flute or on the harp be recognized?
8 For if the trumpet sounds an indistinct call, who will get ready for battle?
9 In the same way, unless you with the tongue use speech that is easily understood, how will anyone know what is being said? You will, in fact, be speaking into the air.
10 It may be that there are many kinds of speech in the world, and yet no kind is without meaning.
11 For if I do not understand the sense of the speech, I will be a foreigner to the one speaking, and the one speaking will be a foreigner to me.
12 So also with you, since you eagerly desire the gifts of the spirit, seek to abound in gifts that will build up the congregation.
13 Therefore, let the one who speaks in a tongue pray that he may interpret.
14 For if I am praying in a tongue, it is my gift of the spirit that is praying, but my mind is unproductive.
15 What is to be done, then? I will pray with the gift of the spirit, but I will also pray with my mind. I will sing praise with the gift of the spirit, but I will also sing praise with my mind.
16 Otherwise, if you offer praise with a gift of the spirit, how will the ordinary person in your midst say “Amen” to your giving of thanks, since he does not know what you are saying?
17 True, you are giving thanks in a fine way, but the other man is not being built up.
18 I thank God that I speak in more tongues than all of you do.
19 Nevertheless, in a congregation I would rather speak five words with my mind, that I might also instruct others, than ten thousand words in a tongue.
20 Brothers, do not become young children in your understanding, but be young children as to badness; and become full-grown in your understanding.
21 In the Law it is written: “‘With the tongues of foreigners and with the lips of strangers I will speak to this people, and even then they will refuse to listen to me,’ says Jehovah.”
22 Therefore, tongues are not a sign for the believers but for the unbelievers, whereas prophecy is not for the unbelievers but for the believers.
23 So if the whole congregation comes together to one place and they all speak in tongues, but ordinary people or unbelievers come in, will they not say that you have lost your minds?
24 But if you are all prophesying and an unbeliever or an ordinary person comes in, he will be reproved and closely examined by them all.
25 The secrets of his heart then become evident, so that he will fall facedown and worship God, declaring: “God is really among you.”
26 What is to be done, then, brothers? When you come together, one has a psalm, another has a teaching, another has a revelation, another has a tongue, and another has an interpretation. Let all things take place for building up.
27 And if someone speaks in a tongue, let it be limited to two or three at the most, and in turns, and someone must interpret.
28 But if there is no interpreter, he must keep silent in the congregation and speak to himself and to God.
29 Let two or three prophets speak, and let the others discern the meaning.
30 But if another one receives a revelation while sitting there, let the first speaker keep silent.
31 For you can all prophesy one at a time, so that all may learn and all may be encouraged.
32 And gifts of the spirit of the prophets are to be controlled by the prophets.
33 For God is a God not of disorder but of peace. As in all the congregations of the holy ones,
34 let the women keep silent in the congregations, for it is not permitted for them to speak. Rather, let them be in subjection, as the Law also says.
35 If they want to learn something, let them ask their husbands at home, for it is disgraceful for a woman to speak in the congregation.
36 Was it from you that the word of God originated, or did it reach only as far as you?
37 If anyone thinks he is a prophet or is gifted with the spirit, he must acknowledge that the things I am writing to you are the Lord’s commandment.
38 But if anyone disregards this, he will be disregarded.
39 So, my brothers, keep striving to prophesy, and yet do not forbid the speaking in tongues.
40 But let all things take place decently and by arrangement.
16 Now concerning the collection for the holy ones, you may follow the directions I gave to the congregations of Ga·laʹti·a.
2 On the first day of every week, each of you should set something aside according to his own means, so that collections will not take place when I arrive.
3 But when I get there, I will send the men you approve of in your letters to take your kind gift to Jerusalem.
4 However, if it seems advisable for me to go there also, they will go there with me.
5 But I will come to you when I have gone through Mac·e·doʹni·a, for I will be going through Mac·e·doʹni·a;
6 and perhaps I will stay or even spend the winter with you, so that you may accompany me partway to where I may be going.
7 For I do not want to see you now just in passing, since I hope to spend some time with you, if Jehovah permits.
8 But I am remaining in Ephʹe·sus until the Festival of Pentecost,
9 because a large door that leads to activity has been opened to me, but there are many opposers.
10 Now if Timothy arrives, make sure that he has nothing to fear while among you, for he is performing the work of Jehovah, just as I am.
11 Therefore, let no one look down on him. Send him on his way in peace, so that he may come to me, for I am waiting for him together with the brothers.
12 Now concerning A·polʹlos our brother, I strongly urged him to come to you with the brothers. It was not his intention to come now, but he will come when he has the opportunity.
13 Stay awake, stand firm in the faith, carry on in a manly way, grow mighty.
14 Let everything you do be done with love.
15 Now I urge you, brothers: You know that the household of Stephʹa·nas is the firstfruits of A·chaʹia and that they devoted themselves to ministering to the holy ones.
16 May you also keep submitting yourselves to people like that and to all those cooperating and working hard.
17 But I rejoice over the presence of Stephʹa·nas and For·tu·naʹtus and A·chaʹi·cus, because they have made up for your not being here.
18 For they have refreshed my spirit and yours. Therefore, give recognition to men of that sort.
19 The congregations of Asia send you their greetings. Aqʹui·la and Prisʹca together with the congregation that is in their house greet you heartily in the Lord.
20 All the brothers greet you. Greet one another with a holy kiss.
21 Here is my greeting, Paul’s, in my own hand.
22 If anyone has no affection for the Lord, let him be accursed. O our Lord, come!
23 May the undeserved kindness of the Lord Jesus be with you.
24 May my love be with all of you in union with Christ Jesus.
1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through God’s will, and Timothy our brother, to the congregation of God that is in Corinth, including all the holy ones who are in all A·chaʹia:
2 May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
3 Praised be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of tender mercies and the God of all comfort,
4 who comforts us in all our trials so that we may be able to comfort others in any sort of trial with the comfort that we receive from God.
5 For just as the sufferings for the Christ abound in us, so the comfort we receive through the Christ also abounds.
6 Now if we face trials, it is for your comfort and salvation; and if we are being comforted, it is for your comfort, which acts to help you to endure the same sufferings that we also suffer.
7 And our hope for you is unwavering, knowing as we do that just as you share in the sufferings, so you will also share in the comfort.
8 For we do not want you to be unaware, brothers, of the tribulation we experienced in the province of Asia. We were under extreme pressure beyond our own strength, so that we were very uncertain even of our lives.
9 In fact, we felt that we had received the sentence of death. This was so that we would trust, not in ourselves, but in the God who raises up the dead.
10 From such a great risk of death he did rescue us and will rescue us, and our hope is in him that he will also continue to rescue us.
11 You also can help us by your supplication for us, in order that many may give thanks in our behalf for the favor we receive in answer to the prayers of many.
12 For the thing we boast of is this, our conscience bears witness that we have conducted ourselves in the world, and especially toward you, with holiness and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but with God’s undeserved kindness.
13 For we are really not writing you about anything except what you can read and understand, and I hope you will continue to understand these things fully,
14 just as you have also understood to an extent that we are a cause for you to boast, just as you will also be for us in the day of our Lord Jesus.
15 So with this confidence, I was intending to come first to you, so that you might have a second occasion for joy;
16 for I intended to visit you on my way to Mac·e·doʹni·a, to return to you from Mac·e·doʹni·a, and then to have you send me off to Ju·deʹa.
17 Well, when I had such an intention, I did not view the matter lightly, did I? Or do I purpose things in a fleshly way, so that I am saying “Yes, yes” and then “No, no”?
18 But God can be relied on that what we say to you is not “yes” and yet “no.”
19 For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was preached among you through us, that is, through me and Sil·vaʹnus and Timothy, did not become “yes” and yet “no,” but “yes” has become “yes” in his case.
20 For no matter how many the promises of God are, they have become “yes” by means of him. Therefore, also through him is the “Amen” said to God, which brings him glory through us.
21 But the one who guarantees that you and we belong to Christ and the one who anointed us is God.
22 He has also put his seal on us and has given us the token of what is to come, that is, the spirit, in our hearts.
23 Now I call on God as a witness against me that it is to spare you that I have not yet come to Corinth.
24 Not that we are the masters over your faith, but we are fellow workers for your joy, for it is by your faith that you are standing.
2 For I have made up my mind not to come to you again in sadness.
2 For if I make you sad, who will be there to cheer me up except the one I saddened?
3 I wrote what I did, so that when I come I may not be saddened by those over whom I ought to rejoice, because I have confidence that what brings me joy brings all of you the same joy.
4 For out of much tribulation and anguish of heart I wrote you with many tears, not to sadden you, but to let you know the depth of love I have for you.
5 Now if anyone has caused sadness, he has saddened, not me, but all of you to an extent—not to be too harsh in what I say.
6 This rebuke given by the majority is sufficient for such a man;
7 now you should instead kindly forgive and comfort him, so that he may not be overwhelmed by excessive sadness.
8 I therefore exhort you to confirm your love for him.
9 For this is also why I wrote to you: to determine whether you would give proof of your obedience in all things.
10 If you forgive anyone for anything, I do also. In fact, whatever I have forgiven (if I have forgiven anything) has been for your sake in Christ’s sight,
11 so that we may not be overreached by Satan, for we are not ignorant of his designs.
12 Now when I arrived in Troʹas to declare the good news about the Christ and a door was opened to me in the Lord,
13 my spirit felt no relief because of not finding Titus my brother. So I said good-bye to them and departed for Mac·e·doʹni·a.
14 But thanks be to God, who always leads us in a triumphal procession in company with the Christ and through us spreads the fragrance of the knowledge of him in every place!
15 For to God we are a sweet fragrance of Christ among those who are being saved and among those who are perishing;
16 to the latter ones an odor of death leading to death, to the former ones a fragrance of life leading to life. And who is adequately qualified for these things?
17 We are, for we are not peddlers of the word of God as many men are, but we speak in all sincerity as sent from God, yes, in the sight of God and in company with Christ.
3 Are we starting to recommend ourselves again? Or do we need, like some men, letters of recommendation to you or from you?
2 You yourselves are our letter, inscribed on our hearts and known and being read by all mankind.
3 For you are shown to be a letter of Christ written by us as ministers, inscribed not with ink but with the spirit of a living God, not on stone tablets but on fleshly tablets, on hearts.
4 We have this sort of confidence toward God through the Christ.
5 Not that we of ourselves are adequately qualified to consider that anything comes from us, but our being adequately qualified comes from God,
6 who has indeed adequately qualified us to be ministers of a new covenant, not of a written code, but of spirit; for the written code condemns to death, but the spirit makes alive.
7 Now if the code that administers death and that was engraved in letters on stones came with such glory that the sons of Israel could not gaze at the face of Moses because of the glory of his face, a glory that was to be done away with,
8 why should the administering of the spirit not be with even greater glory?
9 For if the code administering condemnation was glorious, how much more glorious would be the administering of righteousness!
10 In fact, even what had once been made glorious has been stripped of glory because of the glory that excels it.
11 For if what was to be done away with was brought in with glory, how much greater would be the glory of what remains!
12 Since we have such a hope, we are using great freeness of speech,
13 and not doing what Moses did when he would put a veil over his face so that the sons of Israel might not gaze intently at the end of what was to be done away with.
14 But their minds were dulled. For to this present day, the same veil remains unlifted when the old covenant is read, because it is taken away only by means of Christ.
15 In fact, to this day whenever Moses is read, a veil lies upon their hearts.
16 But when one turns to Jehovah, the veil is taken away.
17 Now Jehovah is the Spirit, and where the spirit of Jehovah is, there is freedom.
18 And all of us, while we with unveiled faces reflect like mirrors the glory of Jehovah, are transformed into the same image from one degree of glory to another, exactly as it is done by Jehovah the Spirit.
4 Therefore, since we have this ministry through the mercy that was shown us, we do not give up.
2 But we have renounced the shameful, underhanded things, not walking with cunning or adulterating the word of God; but by making the truth manifest, we recommend ourselves to every human conscience in the sight of God.
3 If, in fact, the good news we declare is veiled, it is veiled among those who are perishing,
4 among whom the god of this system of things has blinded the minds of the unbelievers, so that the illumination of the glorious good news about the Christ, who is the image of God, might not shine through.
5 For we are preaching, not about ourselves, but about Jesus Christ as Lord and ourselves as your slaves for Jesus’ sake.
6 For God is the one who said: “Let the light shine out of darkness,” and he has shone on our hearts to illuminate them with the glorious knowledge of God by the face of Christ.
7 However, we have this treasure in earthen vessels, so that the power beyond what is normal may be God’s and not from us.
8 We are hard-pressed in every way, but not cramped beyond movement; we are perplexed, but not absolutely with no way out;
9 we are persecuted, but not abandoned; we are knocked down, but not destroyed.
10 Always we endure in our body the death-dealing treatment that Jesus suffered, that the life of Jesus may also be made manifest in our body.
11 For we who live are ever being brought face-to-face with death for Jesus’ sake, so that the life of Jesus may also be made manifest in our mortal flesh.
12 So death is at work in us, but life in you.
13 Now because we have the same spirit of faith as that of which it is written: “I exercised faith, therefore I spoke”; we too exercise faith and therefore we speak,
14 knowing that the One who raised Jesus up will raise us up also with Jesus and will present us together with you.
15 For all these things are for your sake, so that the increase of the undeserved kindness should abound even more because many more are offering thanksgiving to the glory of God.
16 Therefore, we do not give up, but even if the man we are outside is wasting away, certainly the man we are inside is being renewed from day to day.
17 For though the tribulation is momentary and light, it works out for us a glory that is of more and more surpassing greatness and is everlasting;
18 while we keep our eyes, not on the things seen, but on the things unseen. For the things seen are temporary, but the things unseen are everlasting.
5 For we know that if our earthly house, this tent, should be torn down, we are to have a building from God, a house not made with hands, everlasting in the heavens.
2 For in this house we do indeed groan, earnestly desiring to put on the one for us from heaven,
3 so that when we do put it on, we will not be found naked.
4 In fact, we who are in this tent groan, being weighed down, because we do not want to put this one off, but we want to put the other on, so that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life.
5 Now the one who prepared us for this very thing is God, who gave us the spirit as a token of what is to come.
6 So we are always of good courage and know that while we have our home in the body, we are absent from the Lord,
7 for we are walking by faith, not by sight.
8 But we are of good courage and would prefer to be absent from the body and to make our home with the Lord.
9 So whether at home with him or absent from him, we make it our aim to be acceptable to him.
10 For we must all appear before the judgment seat of the Christ, so that each one may be repaid according to the things he has practiced while in the body, whether good or bad.
11 Therefore, since we know the fear of the Lord, we keep persuading men, but we are well-known to God. However, I hope that we are well-known also to your consciences.
12 We are not recommending ourselves to you again but giving you an incentive to boast about us, so that you may be able to answer those who boast over the outward appearance but not over what is in the heart.
13 For if we were out of our mind, it was for God; if we are sound in mind, it is for you.
14 For the love the Christ has compels us, because this is what we have concluded, that one man died for all; so, then, all had died.
15 And he died for all so that those who live should live no longer for themselves, but for him who died for them and was raised up.
16 So from now on we know no man from a fleshly viewpoint. Even if we once knew Christ according to the flesh, we certainly no longer know him in that way.
17 Therefore, if anyone is in union with Christ, he is a new creation; the old things passed away; look! new things have come into existence.
18 But all things are from God, who reconciled us to himself through Christ and gave us the ministry of the reconciliation,
19 namely, that God was by means of Christ reconciling a world to himself, not counting their offenses against them, and he entrusted to us the message of the reconciliation.
20 Therefore, we are ambassadors substituting for Christ, as though God were making an appeal through us. As substitutes for Christ, we beg: “Become reconciled to God.”
21 The one who did not know sin, he made to be sin for us, so that by means of him we might become God’s righteousness.
6 Working together with him, we also urge you not to accept the undeserved kindness of God and miss its purpose.
2 For he says: “In an acceptable time I heard you, and in a day of salvation I helped you.” Look! Now is the especially acceptable time. Look! Now is the day of salvation.
3 In no way are we giving any cause for stumbling, so that no fault may be found with our ministry;
4 but in every way we recommend ourselves as God’s ministers, by the endurance of much, by tribulations, by times of need, by difficulties,
5 by beatings, by imprisonments, by riots, by hard work, by sleepless nights, by times without food;
6 by purity, by knowledge, by patience, by kindness, by holy spirit, by love free from hypocrisy,
7 by truthful speech, by God’s power; through the weapons of righteousness in the right hand and in the left,
8 through glory and dishonor, through bad report and good report. We are regarded as deceivers and yet we are truthful,
9 as unknown and yet we are recognized, as dying and yet look! we live, as punished and yet not handed over to death,
10 as sorrowing but ever rejoicing, as poor but making many rich, as having nothing and yet possessing all things.
11 We have opened our mouth to speak to you, Corinthians, and we have opened wide our heart.
12 We are not restricted in our affections for you, but you are restricted in your own tender affections for us.
13 So in response—I speak as to my children—you too open your hearts wide.
14 Do not become unevenly yoked with unbelievers. For what fellowship do righteousness and lawlessness have? Or what sharing does light have with darkness?
15 Further, what harmony is there between Christ and Beʹli·al? Or what does a believer share in common with an unbeliever?
16 And what agreement does God’s temple have with idols? For we are a temple of a living God; just as God said: “I will reside among them and walk among them, and I will be their God, and they will be my people.”
17 “‘Therefore, get out from among them, and separate yourselves,’ says Jehovah, ‘and quit touching the unclean thing’”; “‘and I will take you in.’”
18 “‘And I will become a father to you, and you will become sons and daughters to me,’ says Jehovah, the Almighty.”
7 Therefore, since we have these promises, beloved ones, let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.
2 Make room for us in your hearts. We have wronged no one, we have corrupted no one, we have taken advantage of no one.
3 I do not say this to condemn you. For I have said before that you are in our hearts to die together and to live together.
4 I have great freeness of speech toward you. I have great boasting in regard to you. I am filled with comfort; I am overflowing with joy in all our affliction.
5 In fact, when we arrived in Mac·e·doʹni·a, our bodies got no relief, but we continued to be afflicted in every way—there were fights on the outside, fears within.
6 But God, who comforts those who are downhearted, comforted us by the presence of Titus;
7 and not only by his presence but also by the comfort he received because of you, as he reported back to us about your longing for me, your deep sorrow, and your earnest concern for me; so I rejoiced even more.
8 For even if I saddened you by my letter, I do not regret it. Even if I did at first regret it (seeing that the letter saddened you, though only for a little while),
9 now I rejoice, not because you were just saddened, but because you were saddened into repenting. For you were saddened in a godly way, so that you suffered no harm because of us.
10 For sadness in a godly way produces repentance leading to salvation, leaving no regret; but the sadness of the world produces death.
11 For see what a great earnestness your being saddened in a godly way produced in you, yes, clearing of yourselves, yes, indignation, yes, fear, yes, earnest desire, yes, zeal, yes, righting of the wrong! In every respect you demonstrated yourselves to be pure in this matter.
12 Although I wrote to you, I did not do it for the one who did the wrong, nor for the one who was wronged, but so that your earnestness for us might be made evident among you in the sight of God.
13 That is why we have been comforted. But in addition to our comfort, we rejoiced even more over the joy of Titus, because all of you refreshed his spirit.
14 For if I have boasted to him about you, I have not been put to shame; but just as all the things we told you were true, so also our boasting to Titus has proved true.
15 Also, his tender affections toward you are greater as he remembers the obedience of all of you, how you received him with fear and trembling.
16 I rejoice that in every way I may have confidence in you.
8 Now we want you to know, brothers, about the undeserved kindness of God that has been granted to the congregations of Mac·e·doʹni·a.
2 During a great test under affliction, their abundance of joy and their deep poverty made the riches of their generosity abound.
3 For it was according to their means, yes, I testify, it was even beyond their means,
4 while they on their own initiative kept earnestly begging us for the privilege of kindly giving, to have a share in the relief ministry for the holy ones.
5 And not merely as we had hoped, but first they gave themselves to the Lord and to us through God’s will.
6 So we encouraged Titus that, just as he had initiated this work among you, he should also complete this same kind giving on your part.
7 Nevertheless, just as you abound in everything, in faith and word and knowledge and all earnestness and in our love for you, may you also abound in this kind giving.
8 I am saying this, not to command you, but to make you aware of the earnestness of others and to test the genuineness of your love.
9 For you know the undeserved kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, that although he was rich, he became poor for your sake, so that you might become rich through his poverty.
10 And in this I give my opinion: This is for your benefit, seeing that already a year ago you not only initiated the action but also showed your desire to do it.
11 So now, also complete what you started to do, so that your readiness to act may be completed according to the means you have available.
12 For if the readiness is there first, it is especially acceptable according to what a person has, not according to what a person does not have.
13 For I do not want to make it easy for others, but difficult for you;
14 but that by means of an equalizing, your surplus at the present time might offset their need, so that their surplus might also offset your deficiency, that there may be an equalizing.
15 Just as it is written: “The person with much did not have too much, and the person with little did not have too little.”
16 Now thanks be to God for putting the same earnest concern for you in the heart of Titus,
17 because he has indeed responded to the encouragement, but being very eager, he is coming to you on his own initiative.
18 But we are sending along with him the brother whose praise in connection with the good news has spread through all the congregations.
19 Not only that, but he was also appointed by the congregations to be our traveling companion as we administer this kind gift for the glory of the Lord and in proof of our readiness to assist.
20 Thus we are avoiding having any man find fault with us in connection with this liberal contribution that we are administering.
21 For we ‘care for everything honestly, not only in the sight of Jehovah but also in the sight of men.’
22 Moreover, we are sending with them our brother whom we have often tested and found to be diligent in many matters, but now much more diligent on account of his great confidence in you.
23 If, though, there is any question about Titus, he is my companion and a fellow worker for your interests; or if there are questions about our brothers, they are apostles of congregations and a glory of Christ.
24 So demonstrate the proof of your love to them, and show the congregations why we boasted about you.
9 Now concerning the ministry that is for the holy ones, it is not really necessary for me to write you,
2 for I know your willingness about which I am boasting to the Mac·e·doʹni·ans, that A·chaʹia has been ready now for a year, and your zeal has stirred up the majority of them.
3 But I am sending the brothers, so that our boasting about you might not prove empty in this respect and that you may really be ready, just as I said you would be.
4 Otherwise, if the Mac·e·doʹni·ans should come with me and find you not ready, we—not to mention you—should be put to shame by our confidence in you.
5 So I thought it necessary to encourage the brothers to come to you ahead of time and to get your promised bountiful gift ready in advance, so that this might be ready as a generous gift, and not as something extorted.
6 But as to this, whoever sows sparingly will also reap sparingly, and whoever sows bountifully will also reap bountifully.
7 Let each one do just as he has resolved in his heart, not grudgingly or under compulsion, for God loves a cheerful giver.
8 Moreover, God is able to cause all his undeserved kindness to abound toward you so that you are always completely self-sufficient in everything, as well as having plenty for every good work.
9 (Just as it is written: “He has distributed widely; he has given to the poor. His righteousness continues forever.”
10 Now the One who abundantly supplies seed to the sower and bread for eating will supply and multiply the seed for you to sow and will increase the harvest of your righteousness.)
11 In everything you are being enriched for every sort of generosity, which produces through us an expression of thanks to God;
12 because the ministry of this public service is not only to provide well for the needs of the holy ones but also to be rich in many expressions of thanks to God.
13 Through the proof that this relief ministry gives, they glorify God because you are submissive to the good news about the Christ, as you publicly declared, and because you are generous in your contribution to them and to all.
14 And with supplication for you, they express affection for you because of the surpassing undeserved kindness of God upon you.
15 Thanks be to God for his indescribable free gift.
10 Now I myself, Paul, appeal to you by the mildness and kindness of the Christ, lowly though I am when among you face-to-face, but bold toward you when absent.
2 I beg that when present, I may not have to be bold and take the strong measures that I expect against some who view us as if we walked in a fleshly manner.
3 For though we walk in the flesh, we do not wage warfare according to what we are in the flesh.
4 For the weapons of our warfare are not fleshly, but powerful by God for overturning strongly entrenched things.
5 For we are overturning reasonings and every lofty thing raised up against the knowledge of God, and we are bringing every thought into captivity to make it obedient to the Christ;
6 and we are prepared to inflict punishment for every disobedience, as soon as your own obedience is complete.
7 You look at things according to their face value. If anyone is confident in himself that he belongs to Christ, let him reflect again on this fact: Just as he belongs to Christ, so do we also.
8 For even if I should boast a bit too much about the authority that the Lord gave us to build you up and not to tear you down, I would not be put to shame.
9 For I do not want to seem as though I were trying to terrify you by my letters.
10 For they say: “His letters are weighty and forceful, but his presence in person is weak and his speech contemptible.”
11 Let such a man consider that what we say by letters when absent, this we will also do when present.
12 For we do not dare to class ourselves or compare ourselves with some who recommend themselves. But when they measure themselves by themselves and compare themselves with themselves, they are without understanding.
13 However, we will not boast outside our assigned boundaries, but within the boundary of the territory that God measured out to us, making it reach even as far as you.
14 Really, we are not overextending ourselves as if we did not reach you, for we were the first to reach as far as you with the good news about the Christ.
15 No, we are not boasting outside our assigned boundaries about the labors of someone else, but we hope that as your faith continues to increase, what we have done may be made to increase, within our territory. Then we will abound still more,
16 so that we may declare the good news to the countries beyond you, so as not to boast in what has already been done in someone else’s territory.
17 “But the one who boasts, let him boast in Jehovah.”
18 For it is not the one who recommends himself who is approved, but the one whom Jehovah recommends.
13 This is the third time I am coming to you. “On the testimony of two or three witnesses every matter must be established.”
2 Although I am absent now, it is as if I were present for the second time, and I give my warning in advance to those who sinned previously and to all the rest, that if ever I come again I will not spare them,
3 since you are seeking proof that Christ, who is not weak toward you but strong among you, is really speaking through me.
4 For, indeed, he was executed on the stake because of weakness, but he is alive because of God’s power. True, we also are weak with him, but we will live together with him because of God’s power toward you.
5 Keep testing whether you are in the faith; keep proving what you yourselves are. Or do you not recognize that Jesus Christ is in union with you? Unless you are disapproved.
6 I truly hope you will recognize that we are not disapproved.
7 Now we pray to God that you may do nothing wrong, not that we may appear approved, but that you may do what is fine, even if we may appear disapproved.
8 For we can do nothing against the truth, but only for the truth.
9 We certainly rejoice whenever we are weak but you are powerful. And this is what we are praying for, your being readjusted.
10 That is why I write these things while absent, so that when I am present, I may not have to be severe in using the authority that the Lord gave me, to build up and not to tear down.
11 Finally, brothers, continue to rejoice, to be readjusted, to be comforted, to think in agreement, to live peaceably; and the God of love and of peace will be with you.
12 Greet one another with a holy kiss.
13 All the holy ones send you their greetings.
14 The undeserved kindness of the Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God and the sharing in the holy spirit be with all of you.
4 Now I say that as long as the heir is a young child, he is no different from a slave, although he is the lord of all things,
2 but he is under supervisors and stewards until the day set ahead of time by his father.
3 Likewise, we too, when we were children, were enslaved by the elementary things of the world.
4 But when the full limit of the time arrived, God sent his Son, who was born of a woman and who was under law,
5 that he might release by purchase those under law, so that we might receive the adoption as sons.
6 Now because you are sons, God has sent the spirit of his Son into our hearts, and it cries out: “Abba, Father!”
7 So you are no longer a slave but a son; and if a son, then you are also an heir through God.
8 Nevertheless, when you did not know God, you were enslaved to those who are not really gods.
9 But now that you have come to know God or, rather, have come to be known by God, how is it that you are turning back again to the weak and beggarly elementary things and want to slave for them over again?
10 You are scrupulously observing days and months and seasons and years.
11 I fear for you, that somehow I have wasted my efforts on you.
12 Brothers, I beg you, become as I am, because I also used to be as you are. You did me no wrong.
13 But you know that it was because of a physical illness that I had my first opportunity to declare the good news to you.
14 And though my physical condition was a trial for you, you did not treat me with contempt or disgust; but you received me like an angel of God, like Christ Jesus.
15 Where is that happiness you had? For I bear you witness that, if it had been possible, you would have gouged out your eyes and given them to me.
16 So, then, have I become your enemy because I tell you the truth?
17 They are zealous to win you over, but not for a good purpose; they want to alienate you from me, so that you may be eager to follow them.
18 However, it is always fine for someone to seek zealously after you for a good purpose and not just when I am present with you,
19 my little children, for whom I am again experiencing birth pains until Christ is formed in you.
20 I wish I could be present with you just now and speak in a different way, because I am perplexed over you.
21 Tell me, you who want to be under law, Do you not hear the Law?
22 For example, it is written that Abraham had two sons, one by the servant girl and one by the free woman;
23 but the one by the servant girl was actually born through natural descent and the other by the free woman through a promise.
24 These things may be taken as a symbolic drama; for these women mean two covenants, the one from Mount Siʹnai, which bears children for slavery and which is Haʹgar.
25 Now Haʹgar means Siʹnai, a mountain in Arabia, and she corresponds with the Jerusalem today, for she is in slavery with her children.
26 But the Jerusalem above is free, and she is our mother.
27 For it is written: “Be glad, you barren woman who does not give birth; break into joyful shouting, you woman who does not have birth pains; for the children of the desolate woman are more numerous than those of her who has the husband.”
28 Now you, brothers, are children of the promise the same as Isaac was.
29 But just as then the one born through natural descent began persecuting the one born through spirit, so also now.
30 Nevertheless, what does the scripture say? “Drive out the servant girl and her son, for the son of the servant girl will by no means be an heir with the son of the free woman.”
31 So, brothers, we are children, not of a servant girl, but of the free woman.
5 For such freedom Christ set us free. Therefore, stand firm, and do not let yourselves be confined again in a yoke of slavery.
2 See! I, Paul, am telling you that if you become circumcised, Christ will be of no benefit to you.
3 Again I bear witness to every man who gets circumcised that he is under obligation to keep the whole Law.
4 You are separated from Christ, you who are trying to be declared righteous by means of law; you have fallen away from his undeserved kindness.
5 For our part, we are by spirit eagerly waiting for the hoped-for righteousness resulting from faith.
6 For in union with Christ Jesus, neither circumcision nor uncircumcision is of any value, but faith operating through love is.
7 You were running well. Who hindered you from continuing to obey the truth?
8 This sort of persuasion does not come from the One calling you.
9 A little leaven ferments the whole batch of dough.
10 I am confident that you who are in union with the Lord will not come to think otherwise; but the one who is causing you trouble, whoever he may be, will receive the judgment he deserves.
11 As for me, brothers, if I am still preaching circumcision, why am I still being persecuted? In that case the stumbling block of the torture stake has been eliminated.
12 I wish the men who are trying to unsettle you would emasculate themselves.
13 You were called to freedom, brothers; only do not use this freedom as an opportunity to pursue fleshly desires, but through love slave for one another.
14 For the entire Law has been fulfilled in one commandment, namely: “You must love your neighbor as yourself.”
15 If, though, you keep on biting and devouring one another, look out that you do not get annihilated by one another.
16 But I say, Keep walking by spirit and you will carry out no fleshly desire at all.
17 For the flesh is against the spirit in its desire, and the spirit against the flesh; these are opposed to each other, so that you do not do the very things you want to do.
18 Furthermore, if you are being led by spirit, you are not under law.
19 Now the works of the flesh are plainly seen, and they are sexual immorality, uncleanness, brazen conduct,
20 idolatry, spiritism, hostility, strife, jealousy, fits of anger, dissensions, divisions, sects,
21 envy, drunkenness, wild parties, and things like these. I am forewarning you about these things, the same way I already warned you, that those who practice such things will not inherit God’s Kingdom.
22 On the other hand, the fruitage of the spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faith,
23 mildness, self-control. Against such things there is no law.
24 Moreover, those who belong to Christ Jesus have nailed to the stake the flesh together with its passions and desires.
25 If we are living by spirit, let us also go on walking orderly by spirit.
26 Let us not become egotistical, stirring up competition with one another, envying one another.
6 Brothers, even if a man takes a false step before he is aware of it, you who have spiritual qualifications try to readjust such a man in a spirit of mildness. But keep an eye on yourself, for fear you too may be tempted.
2 Go on carrying the burdens of one another, and in this way you will fulfill the law of the Christ.
3 For if anyone thinks he is something when he is nothing, he is deceiving himself.
4 But let each one examine his own actions, and then he will have cause for rejoicing in regard to himself alone, and not in comparison with the other person.
5 For each one will carry his own load.
6 Moreover, let anyone who is being taught the word share in all good things with the one who gives such teaching.
7 Do not be misled: God is not one to be mocked. For whatever a person is sowing, this he will also reap;
8 because the one sowing with a view to his flesh will reap corruption from his flesh, but the one sowing with a view to the spirit will reap everlasting life from the spirit.
9 So let us not give up in doing what is fine, for in due time we will reap if we do not tire out.
10 So, then, as long as we have the opportunity, let us work what is good toward all, but especially toward those related to us in the faith.
11 See with what large letters I have written you with my own hand.
12 All those who want to make a good impression in the flesh are the ones who try to compel you to get circumcised, doing so only to avoid being persecuted for the torture stake of the Christ.
13 For even those who are getting circumcised do not keep the Law themselves, but they want you to be circumcised so that they may have cause for boasting about your flesh.
14 But may I never boast, except in the torture stake of our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom the world has been put to death with regard to me and I with regard to the world.
15 For neither is circumcision anything nor is uncircumcision, but a new creation is.
16 As for all those who walk orderly by this rule of conduct, peace and mercy be upon them, yes, upon the Israel of God.
17 From now on let no one make trouble for me, for I am bearing on my body the brand marks of a slave of Jesus.
18 The undeserved kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ be with the spirit you show, brothers. Amen.
1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through God’s will, to the holy ones who are in Ephʹe·sus and are faithful in union with Christ Jesus:
2 May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
3 Praised be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for he has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places in union with Christ,
4 as he chose us to be in union with him before the founding of the world, that we should be holy and unblemished before him in love.
5 For he foreordained us to be adopted as his own sons through Jesus Christ, according to his good pleasure and will,
6 in praise of his glorious undeserved kindness that he kindly bestowed on us by means of his beloved one.
7 By means of him we have the release by ransom through the blood of that one, yes, the forgiveness of our trespasses, according to the riches of his undeserved kindness.
8 This undeserved kindness he caused to abound toward us in all wisdom and understanding
9 by making known to us the sacred secret of his will. It is according to his good pleasure that he himself purposed
10 for an administration at the full limit of the appointed times, to gather all things together in the Christ, the things in the heavens and the things on the earth. Yes, in him
11 with whom we are in union and were assigned as heirs, having been foreordained according to the purpose of the one who accomplishes all things as he decides according to his will,
12 so that we who have been first to hope in the Christ should serve for the praise of his glory.
13 But you also hoped in him after you heard the word of truth, the good news about your salvation. After you believed, you were sealed by means of him with the promised holy spirit,
14 which is a token in advance of our inheritance, for the purpose of releasing God’s own possession by a ransom, to his glorious praise.
15 That is why I also, since I have heard of the faith that you have in the Lord Jesus and the love that you demonstrate toward all the holy ones,
16 never stop giving thanks for you. I continue mentioning you in my prayers,
17 that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give you a spirit of wisdom and of revelation in the accurate knowledge of him.
18 He has enlightened the eyes of your heart, so that you may know to what hope he called you, what glorious riches he holds as an inheritance for the holy ones,
19 and how surpassing the greatness of his power is toward us believers. It is according to the operation of the mightiness of his strength,
20 which he exercised toward Christ when he raised him up from the dead and seated him at his right hand in the heavenly places,
21 far above every government and authority and power and lordship and every name that is named, not only in this system of things but also in that to come.
22 He also subjected all things under his feet and made him head over all things with regard to the congregation,
23 which is his body, the fullness of him who fills up all things in all.
2 Furthermore, God made you alive, though you were dead in your trespasses and sins,
2 in which you at one time walked according to the system of things of this world, according to the ruler of the authority of the air, the spirit that is now at work in the sons of disobedience.
3 Yes, among them we all at one time conducted ourselves in harmony with the desires of our flesh, carrying out the will of the flesh and of our thoughts, and we were naturally children of wrath just as the rest.
4 But God, being rich in mercy, because of his great love with which he loved us,
5 made us alive together with the Christ, even when we were dead in trespasses—by undeserved kindness you have been saved.
6 Moreover, he raised us up together and seated us together in the heavenly places in union with Christ Jesus,
7 so that in the coming systems of things he might demonstrate the surpassing riches of his undeserved kindness in his graciousness toward us in union with Christ Jesus.
8 By this undeserved kindness you have been saved through faith, and this is not of your own doing; rather, it is God’s gift.
9 No, it is not a result of works, so that no one should have grounds for boasting.
10 We are God’s handiwork and were created in union with Christ Jesus for good works, which God determined in advance for us to walk in them.
11 Therefore, remember that at one time you, people of the nations by fleshly descent, were the ones called “uncircumcision” by those called “circumcision,” which is made in the flesh by human hands.
12 At that time you were without Christ, alienated from the state of Israel, strangers to the covenants of the promise; you had no hope and were without God in the world.
13 But now in union with Christ Jesus, you who were once far off have come to be near by the blood of the Christ.
14 For he is our peace, the one who made the two groups one and destroyed the wall in between that fenced them off.
15 By means of his flesh he abolished the enmity, the Law of commandments consisting in decrees, in order to make the two groups in union with himself into one new man and to make peace,
16 and to reconcile fully both peoples in one body to God through the torture stake, because he had killed off the enmity by means of himself.
17 And he came and declared the good news of peace to you who were far off, and peace to those near,
18 because through him we, both peoples, have free access to the Father by one spirit.
19 So you are no longer strangers and foreigners, but you are fellow citizens of the holy ones and are members of the household of God,
20 and you have been built up on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, while Christ Jesus himself is the foundation cornerstone.
21 In union with him the whole building, being harmoniously joined together, is growing into a holy temple for Jehovah.
22 In union with him you too are being built up together into a place for God to inhabit by spirit.
3 For this reason I, Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus in behalf of you, the people of the nations—
2 if, really, you have heard about the stewardship of God’s undeserved kindness that was given to me for your sakes,
3 that by way of a revelation the sacred secret was made known to me, just as I wrote previously in brief.
4 So when you read this, you can realize my comprehension of the sacred secret of the Christ.
5 In other generations this secret was not made known to the sons of men as it has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets by spirit,
6 namely, that people of the nations should, in union with Christ Jesus and through the good news, be joint heirs and fellow members of the body and partakers with us of the promise.
7 I became a minister of this according to the free gift of God’s undeserved kindness that was given me through the operation of his power.
8 To me, a man less than the least of all holy ones, this undeserved kindness was given, so that I should declare to the nations the good news about the unfathomable riches of the Christ
9 and should make everyone see the administration of the sacred secret that has been hidden through the ages in God, who created all things.
10 This was so that now, through the congregation, there might be made known to the governments and the authorities in the heavenly places the greatly diversified wisdom of God.
11 This is according to the eternal purpose that he formed in connection with the Christ, Jesus our Lord,
12 by means of whom we have this freeness of speech and free access with confidence through our faith in him.
13 So I ask you not to give up on account of my tribulations in your behalf, for these mean glory for you.
14 For this reason I bend my knees to the Father,
15 to whom every family in heaven and on earth owes its name.
16 I pray that he may grant you through the abundance of his glory to be made mighty in the man you are inside, with power through his spirit,
17 and that through your faith you may have the Christ dwell in your hearts with love. May you be rooted and established on the foundation,
18 in order that with all the holy ones you may be thoroughly able to comprehend fully what is the breadth and length and height and depth,
19 and to know the love of the Christ, which surpasses knowledge, so that you may be filled with all the fullness that God gives.
20 Now to the one who can, according to his power that is operating in us, do more than superabundantly beyond all the things we ask or conceive,
21 to him be the glory by means of the congregation and by means of Christ Jesus to all generations forever and ever. Amen.
4 Therefore I, the prisoner in the Lord, appeal to you to walk worthily of the calling with which you were called,
2 with all humility and mildness, with patience, putting up with one another in love,
3 earnestly endeavoring to maintain the oneness of the spirit in the uniting bond of peace.
4 One body there is, and one spirit, just as you were called to the one hope of your calling;
5 one Lord, one faith, one baptism;
6 one God and Father of all, who is over all and through all and in all.
7 Now undeserved kindness was given to each one of us according to how the Christ measured out the free gift.
8 For it says: “When he ascended on high he carried away captives; he gave gifts in men.”
9 Now what does the expression “he ascended” mean but that he also descended into the lower regions, that is, the earth?
10 The very one who descended is also the one who ascended far above all the heavens, so that he might give fullness to all things.
11 And he gave some as apostles, some as prophets, some as evangelizers, some as shepherds and teachers,
12 with a view to the readjustment of the holy ones, for ministerial work, to build up the body of the Christ,
13 until we all attain to the oneness of the faith and of the accurate knowledge of the Son of God, to being a full-grown man, attaining the measure of stature that belongs to the fullness of the Christ.
14 So we should no longer be children, tossed about as by waves and carried here and there by every wind of teaching by means of the trickery of men, by means of cunning in deceptive schemes.
15 But speaking the truth, let us by love grow up in all things into him who is the head, Christ.
16 From him all the body is harmoniously joined together and made to cooperate through every joint that gives what is needed. When each respective member functions properly, this contributes to the growth of the body as it builds itself up in love.
17 So this is what I say and bear witness to in the Lord, that you should no longer go on walking just as the nations also walk, in the futility of their minds.
18 They are in darkness mentally and alienated from the life that belongs to God, because of the ignorance that is in them, because of the insensitivity of their hearts.
19 Having gone past all moral sense, they gave themselves over to brazen conduct to practice every sort of uncleanness with greediness.
20 But you did not learn the Christ to be like this,
21 if, indeed, you heard him and were taught by means of him, just as truth is in Jesus.
22 You were taught to put away the old personality that conforms to your former course of conduct and that is being corrupted according to its deceptive desires.
23 And you should continue to be made new in your dominant mental attitude,
24 and should put on the new personality that was created according to God’s will in true righteousness and loyalty.
25 Therefore, now that you have put away deceit, each one of you speak truth with his neighbor, because we are members belonging to one another.
26 Be wrathful, but do not sin; do not let the sun set while you are still angry;
27 do not give the Devil an opportunity.
28 Let the one who steals steal no more; rather, let him do hard work, doing good work with his hands, so that he may have something to share with someone in need.
29 Let a rotten word not come out of your mouth, but only what is good for building up as the need may be, to impart what is beneficial to the hearers.
30 Also, do not be grieving God’s holy spirit, with which you have been sealed for a day of releasing by ransom.
31 Put away from yourselves every kind of malicious bitterness, anger, wrath, screaming, and abusive speech, as well as everything injurious.
32 But become kind to one another, tenderly compassionate, freely forgiving one another just as God also by Christ freely forgave you.
5 Therefore, become imitators of God, as beloved children,
2 and go on walking in love, just as the Christ also loved us and gave himself for us as an offering and a sacrifice, a sweet fragrance to God.
3 Let sexual immorality and every sort of uncleanness or greediness not even be mentioned among you, just as is proper for holy people;
4 neither shameful conduct nor foolish talking nor obscene jesting—things that are not befitting—but rather the giving of thanks.
5 For you know this, recognizing it for yourselves, that no sexually immoral person or unclean person or greedy person, which means being an idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of the Christ and of God.
6 Let no man deceive you with empty words, for because of such things the wrath of God is coming upon the sons of disobedience.
7 Therefore, do not be sharers with them;
8 for you were once darkness, but you are now light in connection with the Lord. Go on walking as children of light,
9 for the fruitage of the light consists of every sort of goodness and righteousness and truth.
10 Keep on making sure of what is acceptable to the Lord;
11 and stop sharing in the unfruitful works that belong to the darkness; rather, expose them for what they are.
12 For the things they do in secret are shameful even to mention.
13 Now all the things that are being exposed are made evident by the light, for everything that is being made evident is light.
14 Therefore, it is said: “Awake, O sleeper, and arise from the dead, and the Christ will shine upon you.”
15 So keep strict watch that how you walk is not as unwise but as wise persons,
16 making the best use of your time, because the days are wicked.
17 On this account stop being unreasonable, but keep perceiving what the will of Jehovah is.
18 Also, do not get drunk with wine, in which there is debauchery, but keep getting filled with spirit.
19 Speak to one another with psalms, praises to God, and spiritual songs, singing and accompanying yourselves with music in your hearts to Jehovah,
20 always giving thanks to our God and Father for everything in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
21 Be in subjection to one another in fear of Christ.
22 Let wives be in subjection to their husbands as to the Lord,
23 because a husband is head of his wife just as the Christ is head of the congregation, he being a savior of this body.
24 In fact, as the congregation is in subjection to the Christ, wives should also be to their husbands in everything.
25 Husbands, continue loving your wives, just as the Christ also loved the congregation and gave himself up for it,
26 in order that he might sanctify it, cleansing it with the bath of water by means of the word,
27 so that he might present the congregation to himself in its splendor, without a spot or a wrinkle or any of such things, but holy and without blemish.
28 In the same way husbands should love their wives as their own bodies. A man who loves his wife loves himself,
29 for no man ever hated his own body, but he feeds and cherishes it, just as the Christ does the congregation,
30 because we are members of his body.
31 “For this reason a man will leave his father and his mother and he will stick to his wife, and the two will be one flesh.”
32 This sacred secret is great. Now I am speaking about Christ and the congregation.
33 Nevertheless, each one of you must love his wife as he does himself; on the other hand, the wife should have deep respect for her husband.
6 Children, be obedient to your parents in union with the Lord, for this is righteous.
2 “Honor your father and your mother” is the first command with a promise:
3 “That it may go well with you and you may remain a long time on the earth.”
4 And fathers, do not be irritating your children, but go on bringing them up in the discipline and admonition of Jehovah.
5 Slaves, be obedient to your human masters, with fear and trembling in the sincerity of your hearts, as to the Christ,
6 not only when being watched, just to please men, but as Christ’s slaves doing the will of God whole-souled.
7 Slave with a good attitude, as to Jehovah and not to men,
8 for you know that whatever good each one does, he will receive this back from Jehovah, whether he is a slave or a freeman.
9 Also, you masters, keep treating them in the same way, not threatening, for you know that both their Master and yours is in the heavens, and there is no partiality with him.
10 Finally, go on acquiring power in the Lord and in the mightiness of his strength.
11 Put on the complete suit of armor from God so that you may be able to stand firm against the crafty acts of the Devil;
12 because we have a struggle, not against blood and flesh, but against the governments, against the authorities, against the world rulers of this darkness, against the wicked spirit forces in the heavenly places.
13 For this reason take up the complete suit of armor from God, so that you may be able to resist in the wicked day and, after you have accomplished everything, to stand firm.
14 Stand firm, therefore, with the belt of truth fastened around your waist, wearing the breastplate of righteousness,
15 and having your feet shod in readiness to declare the good news of peace.
16 Besides all of this, take up the large shield of faith, with which you will be able to extinguish all the wicked one’s burning arrows.
17 Also, accept the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, that is, God’s word,
18 while with every form of prayer and supplication you carry on prayer on every occasion in spirit. And to that end stay awake, constantly making supplication in behalf of all the holy ones.
19 Pray also for me, that the words may be given to me when I open my mouth, so that I may be able to speak boldly in making known the sacred secret of the good news,
20 for which I am acting as an ambassador in chains, and that I may speak about it with boldness, as I ought to speak.
21 Now so that you may also know about me and how I am doing, Tychʹi·cus, a beloved brother and faithful minister in the Lord, will make everything known to you.
22 I am sending him to you for this very purpose, so that you may know how we are and that he may comfort your hearts.
23 May the brothers have peace and love with faith from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
24 May the undeserved kindness be with all those loving our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruptness.
1 Paul and Timothy, slaves of Christ Jesus, to all the holy ones in union with Christ Jesus who are in Phi·lipʹpi, along with overseers and ministerial servants:
2 May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
3 I thank my God always when I remember you
4 in every supplication of mine for all of you. I offer each supplication with joy,
5 because of the contribution you have made to the good news from the first day until this moment.
6 For I am confident of this very thing, that the one who started a good work in you will bring it to completion until the day of Christ Jesus.
7 It is only right for me to think this regarding all of you, since I have you in my heart, you who are sharers with me in the undeserved kindness both in my prison bonds and in the defending and legally establishing of the good news.
8 For God is my witness of how I am longing for all of you with such tender affection as Christ Jesus has.
9 And this is what I continue praying, that your love may abound still more and more with accurate knowledge and full discernment;
10 that you may make sure of the more important things, so that you may be flawless and not stumbling others up to the day of Christ;
11 and that you may be filled with righteous fruit, which is through Jesus Christ, to God’s glory and praise.
12 Now I want you to know, brothers, that my situation has actually turned out for the advancement of the good news,
13 so that my prison bonds for the sake of Christ have become public knowledge among all the Prae·toʹri·an Guard and all the rest.
14 Now most of the brothers in the Lord have gained confidence because of my prison bonds, and they are showing all the more courage to speak the word of God fearlessly.
15 True, some are preaching the Christ out of envy and rivalry, but others out of goodwill.
16 The latter are proclaiming the Christ out of love, for they know that I have been appointed to defend the good news;
17 but the former do it out of contentiousness, not with a pure motive, for they are intending to create trouble for me in my prison bonds.
18 With what result? Only that in every way, whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is being proclaimed, and I rejoice over this. In fact, I will also keep on rejoicing,
19 for I know that this will result in my salvation through your supplication and with the support of the spirit of Jesus Christ.
20 This is in harmony with my eager expectation and hope that I will not be ashamed in any respect, but that with all freeness of speech Christ will now, as always before, be magnified by means of my body, whether through life or through death.
21 For in my case, to live is Christ and to die is gain.
22 Now if I am to live on in the flesh, this is a fruitage of my work; yet what I would choose, I do not make known.
23 I am torn between these two things, for I do desire the releasing and the being with Christ, which is, to be sure, far better.
24 However, it is more necessary for me to remain in the flesh for your sakes.
25 So, being confident of this, I know I will remain and continue with all of you for your advancement and your joy in the faith,
26 so that your exultation may overflow in Christ Jesus because of me when I am again present with you.
27 Only behave in a manner worthy of the good news about the Christ, so that whether I come and see you or I am absent, I may hear about you and learn that you are standing firm in one spirit, with one soul, striving side by side for the faith of the good news,
28 and in no way being frightened by your opponents. This very thing is a proof of destruction for them, but of salvation for you; and this is from God.
29 For you have been given the privilege in behalf of Christ, not only to put your faith in him but also to suffer in his behalf.
30 For you are facing the same struggle that you saw me face, which you now hear that I am still facing.
2 If, then, there is any encouragement in Christ, if any consolation of love, if any spiritual fellowship, if any tender affection and compassion,
2 make my joy full by being of the same mind and having the same love, being completely united, having the one thought in mind.
3 Do nothing out of contentiousness or out of egotism, but with humility consider others superior to you,
4 as you look out not only for your own interests, but also for the interests of others.
5 Keep this mental attitude in you that was also in Christ Jesus,
6 who, although he was existing in God’s form, gave no consideration to a seizure, namely, that he should be equal to God.
7 No, but he emptied himself and took a slave’s form and became human.
8 More than that, when he came as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient to the point of death, yes, death on a torture stake.
9 For this very reason, God exalted him to a superior position and kindly gave him the name that is above every other name,
10 so that in the name of Jesus every knee should bend—of those in heaven and those on earth and those under the ground—
11 and every tongue should openly acknowledge that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father.
12 Consequently, my beloved ones, just as you have always obeyed, not only during my presence but now much more readily during my absence, keep working out your own salvation with fear and trembling.
13 For God is the one who for the sake of his good pleasure energizes you, giving you both the desire and the power to act.
14 Keep doing all things free from murmuring and arguments,
15 so that you may come to be blameless and innocent, children of God without a blemish in the midst of a crooked and twisted generation, among whom you are shining as illuminators in the world,
16 keeping a tight grip on the word of life. Then I may have reason for rejoicing in Christ’s day, knowing that I did not run in vain or work hard in vain.
17 However, even if I am being poured out like a drink offering on the sacrifice and the holy service to which your faith has led you, I am glad and I rejoice with all of you.
18 In the same way, you also should be glad and rejoice with me.
19 Now I am hoping in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you shortly, so that I may be encouraged when I receive news about you.
20 For I have no one else of a disposition like his who will genuinely care for your concerns.
21 For all the others are seeking their own interests, not those of Jesus Christ.
22 But you know the proof he gave of himself, that like a child with a father he slaved with me to advance the good news.
23 Therefore, he is the one I am hoping to send just as soon as I see how things turn out for me.
24 Indeed, I am confident in the Lord that I myself will also come soon.
25 But for now I consider it necessary to send to you E·paph·ro·diʹtus, my brother and fellow worker and fellow soldier, and your envoy and personal servant for my need,
26 since he is longing to see all of you and is depressed because you heard he had fallen sick.
27 Indeed, he did fall sick nearly to the point of death; but God had mercy on him, in fact, not only on him but also on me, so that I should not have one grief after another.
28 Therefore, I am sending him with the greatest urgency, so that when you see him you may again rejoice and I may also be less anxious.
29 So give him the customary welcome in the Lord with all joy, and keep holding men of that sort dear,
30 because he nearly died on account of the work of Christ, risking his life in order to make up for your not being here to render personal service to me.
3 Finally, my brothers, continue rejoicing in the Lord. It is not troublesome for me to write the same things to you, and it is for your safety.
2 Look out for the dogs; look out for those who cause injury; look out for those who mutilate the flesh.
3 For we are those with the real circumcision, we who are rendering sacred service by God’s spirit and boasting in Christ Jesus and who do not base our confidence in the flesh,
4 though I, if anyone, do have grounds for confidence in the flesh. If any other man thinks he has grounds for confidence in the flesh, I have more:
5 circumcised the eighth day, of the nation of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew born from Hebrews; regarding law, a Pharisee;
6 regarding zeal, persecuting the congregation; regarding righteousness based on law, one who proved himself blameless.
7 Yet, the things that were gains to me, I have considered loss on account of the Christ.
8 What is more, I do indeed also consider all things to be loss on account of the excelling value of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. For his sake I have taken the loss of all things and I consider them as a lot of refuse, that I may gain Christ
9 and be found in union with him, not because of my own righteousness from following the Law, but because of the righteousness that is through faith in Christ, the righteousness from God based on faith.
10 My aim is to know him and the power of his resurrection and to share in his sufferings, submitting myself to a death like his,
11 to see if at all possible I may attain to the earlier resurrection from the dead.
12 Not that I have already received it or am already made perfect, but I am pressing on to see if I may also lay hold on that for which Christ Jesus selected me.
13 Brothers, I do not yet consider myself as having taken hold of it; but one thing is certain: Forgetting the things behind and stretching forward to the things ahead,
14 I am pressing on toward the goal for the prize of the upward call of God by means of Christ Jesus.
15 Therefore, let those of us who are mature be of this mental attitude, and if you are mentally inclined otherwise in any respect, God will reveal the above attitude to you.
16 At any rate, to the extent we have made progress, let us go on walking orderly in this same course.
17 Unitedly become imitators of me, brothers, and keep your eye on those who are walking in a way that is in harmony with the example we set for you.
18 For there are many—I used to mention them often but now I mention them also with weeping—who are walking as enemies of the torture stake of the Christ.
19 Their end is destruction, and their god is their belly, and their glory is really their shame, and they have their minds on earthly things.
20 But our citizenship exists in the heavens, and we are eagerly waiting for a savior from there, the Lord Jesus Christ,
21 who will transform our humble body to be like his glorious body by his great power that enables him to subject all things to himself.
4 Consequently, my brothers whom I love and long for, my joy and crown, stand firm in this way in the Lord, my beloved ones.
2 I urge Eu·oʹdi·a and I urge Synʹty·che to be of the same mind in the Lord.
3 Yes, I request you also, as a true fellow worker, to keep assisting these women who have striven side by side with me for the good news, along with Clement as well as the rest of my fellow workers, whose names are in the book of life.
4 Always rejoice in the Lord. Again I will say, Rejoice!
5 Let your reasonableness become known to all men. The Lord is near.
6 Do not be anxious over anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving, let your petitions be made known to God;
7 and the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your mental powers by means of Christ Jesus.
8 Finally, brothers, whatever things are true, whatever things are of serious concern, whatever things are righteous, whatever things are chaste, whatever things are lovable, whatever things are well-spoken-of, whatever things are virtuous, and whatever things are praiseworthy, continue considering these things.
9 The things that you learned as well as accepted and heard and saw in connection with me, practice these, and the God of peace will be with you.
10 I rejoice greatly in the Lord that now at last you have renewed your concern for me. Though you were concerned about me, you lacked opportunity to show it.
11 Not that I am saying this because I am in need, for I have learned to be self-sufficient regardless of my circumstances.
12 I know how to be low on provisions and how to have an abundance. In everything and in all circumstances I have learned the secret of both how to be full and how to hunger, both how to have an abundance and how to do without.
13 For all things I have the strength through the one who gives me power.
14 Nevertheless, you did well to share with me in my tribulation.
15 In fact, you Phi·lipʹpi·ans also know that after you first learned the good news, when I departed from Mac·e·doʹni·a, not a congregation shared with me in the matter of giving and receiving, except you alone;
16 for while I was in Thes·sa·lo·niʹca, you sent something to me for my need not just once but twice.
17 Not that I am looking for a gift, but I want the fruitage that brings more credit to your account.
18 However, I have everything I need and even more. I am fully supplied, now that I have received from E·paph·ro·diʹtus what you sent, a sweet fragrance, an acceptable sacrifice, well-pleasing to God.
19 In turn my God will fully supply all your need according to his riches in glory by means of Christ Jesus.
20 Now to our God and Father be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
21 Give my greetings to every holy one in union with Christ Jesus. The brothers who are with me send you their greetings.
22 All the holy ones, but especially those of the household of Caesar, send you their greetings.
23 The undeserved kindness of the Lord Jesus Christ be with the spirit you show.
1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through God’s will, and Timothy our brother,
2 to the holy ones and faithful brothers in union with Christ at Co·losʹsae: May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father.
3 We always thank God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, when we pray for you,
4 since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus and the love you have for all the holy ones
5 because of the hope that is being reserved for you in the heavens. You previously heard about this hope through the message of truth of the good news
6 that has come to you. Just as the good news is bearing fruit and increasing in all the world, so it is also doing among you from the day you heard and accurately knew the undeserved kindness of God in truth.
7 That is what you have learned from our beloved fellow slave Epʹa·phras, who is a faithful minister of the Christ on our behalf.
8 He also made known to us your love in a spiritual way.
9 That is also why from the day we heard of it, we have never stopped praying for you and asking that you may be filled with the accurate knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual comprehension,
10 so as to walk worthily of Jehovah in order to please him fully as you go on bearing fruit in every good work and increasing in the accurate knowledge of God;
11 and may you be strengthened with all power according to his glorious might so that you may endure fully with patience and joy,
12 as you thank the Father, who made you qualify to share in the inheritance of the holy ones in the light.
13 He rescued us from the authority of the darkness and transferred us into the kingdom of his beloved Son,
14 by means of whom we have our release by ransom, the forgiveness of our sins.
15 He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation;
16 because by means of him all other things were created in the heavens and on the earth, the things visible and the things invisible, whether they are thrones or lordships or governments or authorities. All other things have been created through him and for him.
17 Also, he is before all other things, and by means of him all other things were made to exist,
18 and he is the head of the body, the congregation. He is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, so that he might become the one who is first in all things;
19 because God was pleased to have all fullness to dwell in him,
20 and through him to reconcile to himself all other things by making peace through the blood he shed on the torture stake, whether the things on the earth or the things in the heavens.
21 Indeed, you who were once alienated and enemies because your minds were on the works that were wicked,
22 he has now reconciled by means of that one’s fleshly body through his death, in order to present you holy and unblemished and open to no accusation before him—
23 provided, of course, that you continue in the faith, established on the foundation and steadfast, not being shifted away from the hope of that good news that you heard and that was preached in all creation under heaven. Of this good news I, Paul, became a minister.
24 I am now rejoicing in my sufferings for your sake, and I am undergoing the tribulations of the Christ that are yet lacking in my flesh in behalf of his body, which is the congregation.
25 I became a minister of this congregation in accord with the stewardship from God that was given to me in your behalf to preach the word of God fully,
26 the sacred secret that was hidden from the past systems of things and from the past generations. But now it has been revealed to his holy ones,
27 to whom God has been pleased to make known among the nations the glorious riches of this sacred secret, which is Christ in union with you, the hope of his glory.
28 He is the one we are proclaiming, admonishing everyone and teaching everyone in all wisdom, so that we may present every person complete in union with Christ.
29 To this end I am indeed working hard, exerting myself with his strength that is operating powerfully within me.
2 For I want you to realize how great a struggle I am having in your behalf and in behalf of those at La·o·di·ceʹa and in behalf of all those who have not personally seen me.
2 This is so that their hearts may be comforted and that they may be harmoniously joined together in love and may have all the riches that result from the full assurance of their understanding, in order to gain an accurate knowledge of the sacred secret of God, namely, Christ.
3 Carefully concealed in him are all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge.
4 I am saying this so that no one may delude you with persuasive arguments.
5 Though I am absent in body, I am with you in spirit, rejoicing to see your good order and the firmness of your faith in Christ.
6 Therefore, just as you have accepted Christ Jesus the Lord, go on walking in union with him,
7 being rooted and built up in him and being stabilized in the faith, just as you were taught, and overflowing with thanksgiving.
8 Look out that no one takes you captive by means of the philosophy and empty deception according to human tradition, according to the elementary things of the world and not according to Christ;
9 because it is in him that all the fullness of the divine quality dwells bodily.
10 So you have acquired a fullness by means of him, the one who is the head of all government and authority.
11 By your relationship with him, you were also circumcised with a circumcision performed without hands by stripping off the fleshly body, by the circumcision that belongs to the Christ.
12 For you were buried with him in his baptism, and by your relationship with him you were also raised up together through your faith in the powerful work of God, who raised him up from the dead.
13 Furthermore, though you were dead in your trespasses and in the uncircumcised state of your flesh, God made you alive together with him. He kindly forgave us all our trespasses
14 and erased the handwritten document that consisted of decrees and was in opposition to us. He has taken it out of the way by nailing it to the torture stake.
15 He has stripped the governments and the authorities bare and has publicly exhibited them as conquered, leading them in a triumphal procession by means of it.
16 Therefore, do not let anyone judge you about what you eat and drink or about the observance of a festival or of the new moon or of a sabbath.
17 Those things are a shadow of the things to come, but the reality belongs to the Christ.
18 Let no man deprive you of the prize who takes delight in a false humility and a form of worship of the angels, “taking his stand on” the things he has seen. He is actually puffed up without proper cause by his fleshly frame of mind,
19 and he is not holding fast to the head, to the one through whom the whole body is supplied and harmoniously joined together by means of its joints and ligaments and made to grow with the growth that is from God.
20 If you died together with Christ with respect to the elementary things of the world, why do you live as if still part of the world by further subjecting yourselves to the decrees:
21 “Do not handle, nor taste, nor touch,”
22 referring to things that all perish with their use, according to the commands and teachings of men?
23 Although those things have an appearance of wisdom in a self-imposed form of worship and a false humility, a harsh treatment of the body, they are of no value in combating the satisfying of the flesh.
3 If, however, you were raised up with the Christ, go on seeking the things above, where the Christ is seated at the right hand of God.
2 Keep your minds fixed on the things above, not on the things on the earth.
3 For you died, and your life has been hidden with the Christ in union with God.
4 When the Christ, our life, is made manifest, then you also will be made manifest with him in glory.
5 Deaden, therefore, your body members that are on the earth as respects sexual immorality, uncleanness, uncontrolled sexual passion, hurtful desire, and greediness, which is idolatry.
6 On account of those things the wrath of God is coming.
7 That is how you too used to conduct yourselves in your former way of life.
8 But now you must put them all away from you: wrath, anger, badness, abusive speech, and obscene talk out of your mouth.
9 Do not lie to one another. Strip off the old personality with its practices,
10 and clothe yourselves with the new personality, which through accurate knowledge is being made new according to the image of the One who created it,
11 where there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, foreigner, Scythʹi·an, slave, or freeman; but Christ is all things and in all.
12 Accordingly, as God’s chosen ones, holy and loved, clothe yourselves with the tender affections of compassion, kindness, humility, mildness, and patience.
13 Continue putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely even if anyone has a cause for complaint against another. Just as Jehovah freely forgave you, you must also do the same.
14 But besides all these things, clothe yourselves with love, for it is a perfect bond of union.
15 Also, let the peace of the Christ rule in your hearts, for you were called to that peace in one body. And show yourselves thankful.
16 Let the word of the Christ reside in you richly in all wisdom. Keep on teaching and encouraging one another with psalms, praises to God, spiritual songs sung with gratitude, singing in your hearts to Jehovah.
17 Whatever it is that you do in word or in deed, do everything in the name of the Lord Jesus, thanking God the Father through him.
18 You wives, be in subjection to your husbands, as it is becoming in the Lord.
19 You husbands, keep on loving your wives and do not be bitterly angry with them.
20 You children, be obedient to your parents in everything, for this is well-pleasing to the Lord.
21 You fathers, do not be exasperating your children, so that they do not become downhearted.
22 You slaves, be obedient in everything to those who are your human masters, not only when they are watching, just to please men, but with sincerity of heart, with fear of Jehovah.
23 Whatever you are doing, work at it whole-souled as for Jehovah, and not for men,
24 for you know that it is from Jehovah you will receive the inheritance as a reward. Slave for the Master, Christ.
25 Certainly the one who does wrong will be repaid for the wrong he has done, and there is no partiality.
4 You masters, treat your slaves in a righteous and fair way, knowing that you also have a Master in heaven.
2 Persevere in prayer, remaining awake in it with thanksgiving.
3 At the same time, pray also for us, that God may open a door for the word so that we can declare the sacred secret about the Christ, for which I am in prison bonds,
4 and that I may proclaim it as clearly as I ought to.
5 Go on walking in wisdom toward those on the outside, making the best use of your time.
6 Let your words always be gracious, seasoned with salt, so that you will know how you should answer each person.
7 Tychʹi·cus, my beloved brother and faithful minister and fellow slave in the Lord, will tell you all the news about me.
8 I am sending him to you so that you will know how we are and that he may comfort your hearts.
9 He is coming along with O·nesʹi·mus, my faithful and beloved brother, who is from among you; they will tell you all the things happening here.
10 Ar·is·tarʹchus, my fellow captive, sends you his greetings, and so does Mark, the cousin of Barʹna·bas (concerning whom you received instructions to welcome him if he comes to you),
11 and Jesus who is called Justus, who are of those circumcised. Only these are my fellow workers for the Kingdom of God, and they have become a source of great comfort to me.
12 Epʹa·phras, a slave of Christ Jesus who is from among you, sends you his greetings. He is always exerting himself in your behalf in his prayers, so that you may finally stand complete and with firm conviction in all the will of God.
13 For I bear him witness that he makes great efforts in your behalf and in behalf of those in La·o·di·ceʹa and Hi·e·rapʹo·lis.
14 Luke, the beloved physician, sends you his greetings, and so does Deʹmas.
15 Give my greetings to the brothers in La·o·di·ceʹa and to Nymʹpha and to the congregation at her house.
16 And when this letter has been read among you, arrange for it also to be read in the congregation of the La·o·di·ceʹans and for you also to read the one from La·o·di·ceʹa.
17 Also, tell Ar·chipʹpus: “Pay attention to the ministry that you accepted in the Lord, in order to fulfill it.”
18 Here is my greeting, Paul’s, in my own hand. Keep my prison bonds in mind. The undeserved kindness be with you.
1 Paul, Sil·vaʹnus, and Timothy, to the congregation of the Thes·sa·loʹni·ans in union with God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ: May you have undeserved kindness and peace.
2 We always thank God when we mention all of you in our prayers,
3 for we continually remember your faithful work, your loving labor, and your endurance because of your hope in our Lord Jesus Christ in the presence of our God and Father.
4 For we know, brothers loved by God, his choosing of you,
5 because the good news we preach did not come to you with speech alone but also with power and with holy spirit and with strong conviction, just as you know what sort of men we became among you for your sakes.
6 And you became imitators of us and of the Lord, seeing that you accepted the word under much tribulation with joy of holy spirit,
7 so that you became an example to all the believers in Mac·e·doʹni·a and in A·chaʹia.
8 The fact is, not only has the word of Jehovah sounded out from you in Mac·e·doʹni·a and A·chaʹia but your faith in God has spread abroad in every place, so that we do not need to say anything.
9 For they themselves keep reporting about our first contact with you and how you turned to God from your idols to slave for a living and true God,
10 and to wait for his Son from the heavens, whom he raised up from the dead, namely, Jesus, who rescues us from the wrath that is coming.
2 You yourselves surely know, brothers, that our visit to you has not been without results.
2 For although we had first suffered and been insolently treated in Phi·lipʹpi, as you know, we mustered up boldness by means of our God to tell you the good news of God in the face of much opposition.
3 For the exhortation we give does not spring from error or from uncleanness or with deceit,
4 but just as we have been approved by God to be entrusted with the good news, so we speak to please, not men, but God, who examines our hearts.
5 In fact, you know that we never used flattering speech or put on any false front with greedy motives; God is witness!
6 Nor have we been seeking glory from men, either from you or from others, though we could be an expensive burden as apostles of Christ.
7 On the contrary, we became gentle in your midst, as when a nursing mother tenderly cares for her own children.
8 So having tender affection for you, we were determined to impart to you, not only the good news of God but also our very selves, because you became so beloved to us.
9 Surely you remember, brothers, our labor and toil. We were working night and day, so that we would not put an expensive burden on any one of you, when we preached the good news of God to you.
10 You are witnesses, God is also, of how loyal and righteous and blameless we behaved toward you believers.
11 You well know that we kept exhorting and consoling you and bearing witness to each one of you, just as a father does his children,
12 so that you would go on walking worthily of God, who is calling you to his Kingdom and glory.
13 Indeed, that is why we also thank God unceasingly, because when you received God’s word, which you heard from us, you accepted it not as the word of men but, just as it truthfully is, as the word of God, which is also at work in you believers.
14 For you, brothers, became imitators of the congregations of God in union with Christ Jesus that are in Ju·deʹa, because you suffered at the hands of your own countrymen the same things that they also are suffering at the hands of the Jews,
15 who even killed the Lord Jesus and the prophets and persecuted us. Furthermore, they are not pleasing God, but are against the interests of all men,
16 as they try to prevent us from speaking to people of the nations so that these might be saved. In this way they always fill up the measure of their sins. But his wrath has at last come upon them.
17 But when we were separated from you, brothers, for just a short time (in person, not in our hearts), because of our strong desire, we made every effort to see you in person.
18 For this reason we wanted to come to you, yes I, Paul, tried not just once but twice; yet Satan cut across our path.
19 For what is our hope or joy or crown of exultation before our Lord Jesus at his presence? Is it not in fact you?
20 You certainly are our glory and joy.
3 So when we could bear it no longer, we thought it best to stay on alone in Athens;
2 and we sent Timothy, our brother and God’s minister in the good news about the Christ, to make you firm and comfort you regarding your faith,
3 so that no one might be shaken by these tribulations. For you yourselves know that we cannot avoid suffering such things.
4 For when we were with you, we used to tell you in advance that we would suffer tribulation, and that is what has happened, just as you know.
5 That is why, when I could bear it no longer, I sent to learn of your faithfulness, in case somehow the Tempter might have tempted you, and our labor might have turned out to be in vain.
6 But Timothy has just now come to us from you and has given us the good news about your faithfulness and love, that you always continue to remember us fondly and that you long to see us in the same way as we also do you.
7 That is why, brothers, in all our distress and tribulation, we have been comforted because of you and the faithfulness you demonstrate.
8 Because we are revitalized if you are standing firm in the Lord.
9 For how can we show our thanks to God concerning you in return for the great joy we feel before our God on your account?
10 Night and day we make supplications as earnestly as we can to see you in person and to supply what is lacking in your faith.
11 Now may our God and Father himself and our Lord Jesus make a way for us to come to you.
12 Moreover, may the Lord cause you to increase, yes, to abound in love for one another and for all, just as we do for you,
13 so that he may make your hearts firm, blameless in holiness before our God and Father at the presence of our Lord Jesus with all his holy ones.
4 Finally, brothers, just as you received instruction from us on how you should walk in order to please God, just as you are in fact walking, we request you and appeal to you by the Lord Jesus to keep doing it more fully.
2 For you know the instructions we gave you through the Lord Jesus.
3 For this is the will of God, that you should be holy and abstain from sexual immorality.
4 Each one of you should know how to control his own body in holiness and honor,
5 not with greedy, uncontrolled sexual passion like the nations have that do not know God.
6 No one should go beyond proper limits and take advantage of his brother in this matter, because Jehovah exacts punishment for all these things, just as we told you previously and also strongly warned you.
7 For God has called us, not for uncleanness, but for holiness.
8 So, then, the man who disregards this is disregarding, not man, but God, who gives you his holy spirit.
9 However, concerning brotherly love, you do not need us to write to you, for you yourselves are taught by God to love one another.
10 In fact, you are doing so toward all the brothers in all of Mac·e·doʹni·a. But we urge you, brothers, to go on doing so in fuller measure.
11 Make it your aim to live quietly and to mind your own business and to work with your hands, just as we instructed you,
12 so that you may walk decently in the eyes of people outside and not need anything.
13 Moreover, brothers, we do not want you to be ignorant about those who are sleeping in death, so that you may not sorrow as the rest do who have no hope.
14 For if we have faith that Jesus died and rose again, so too God will bring with him those who have fallen asleep in death through Jesus.
15 For this is what we tell you by Jehovah’s word, that we the living who survive to the presence of the Lord will in no way precede those who have fallen asleep in death;
16 because the Lord himself will descend from heaven with a commanding call, with an archangel’s voice and with God’s trumpet, and those who are dead in union with Christ will rise first.
17 Afterward we the living who are surviving will, together with them, be caught away in clouds to meet the Lord in the air; and thus we will always be with the Lord.
18 So keep comforting one another with these words.
5 Now as for the times and the seasons, brothers, you need nothing to be written to you.
2 For you yourselves know very well that Jehovah’s day is coming exactly as a thief in the night.
3 Whenever it is that they are saying, “Peace and security!” then sudden destruction is to be instantly on them, just like birth pains on a pregnant woman, and they will by no means escape.
4 But you, brothers, you are not in darkness, so that the day should overtake you as it would thieves,
5 for you are all sons of light and sons of day. We belong neither to night nor to darkness.
6 So, then, let us not sleep on as the rest do, but let us stay awake and keep our senses.
7 For those who sleep, sleep at night, and those who get drunk are drunk at night.
8 But as for us who belong to the day, let us keep our senses and put on the breastplate of faith and love and the hope of salvation as a helmet
9 because God assigned us, not to wrath, but to the acquiring of salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ.
10 He died for us, so that whether we stay awake or are asleep, we should live together with him.
11 Therefore, keep encouraging one another and building one another up, just as you are in fact doing.
12 Now we request you, brothers, to show respect for those who are working hard among you and presiding over you in the Lord and admonishing you;
13 and to give them extraordinary consideration in love because of their work. Be peaceable with one another.
14 On the other hand, we urge you, brothers, to warn the disorderly, speak consolingly to those who are depressed, support the weak, be patient toward all.
15 See that no one repays injury for injury to anyone, but always pursue what is good toward one another and to all others.
16 Always be rejoicing.
17 Pray constantly.
18 Give thanks for everything. This is God’s will for you in Christ Jesus.
19 Do not put out the fire of the spirit.
20 Do not treat prophecies with contempt.
21 Make sure of all things; hold fast to what is fine.
22 Abstain from every form of wickedness.
23 May the God of peace himself sanctify you completely. And may the spirit and soul and body of you brothers, sound in every respect, be preserved blameless at the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ.
24 The one who is calling you is faithful, and he will surely do so.
25 Brothers, keep praying for us.
26 Greet all the brothers with a holy kiss.
27 I am putting you under the solemn obligation by the Lord to have this letter read to all the brothers.
28 The undeserved kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
1 Paul, Sil·vaʹnus, and Timothy, to the congregation of the Thes·sa·loʹni·ans in union with God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:
2 May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
3 We are obligated always to give thanks to God for you, brothers. This is fitting, because your faith is growing exceedingly and the love of each and every one of you is increasing toward one another.
4 As a result we ourselves take pride in you among the congregations of God because of your endurance and faith in all your persecutions and the hardships that you are suffering.
5 This is a proof of the righteous judgment of God, leading to your being counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which you are indeed suffering.
6 This takes into account that it is righteous on God’s part to repay tribulation to those who make tribulation for you.
7 But you who suffer tribulation will be given relief along with us at the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven with his powerful angels
8 in a flaming fire, as he brings vengeance on those who do not know God and those who do not obey the good news about our Lord Jesus.
9 These very ones will undergo the judicial punishment of everlasting destruction from before the Lord and from the glory of his strength,
10 at the time when he comes to be glorified in connection with his holy ones and to be regarded in that day with wonder among all those who exercised faith, because the witness we gave met with faith among you.
11 To that very end we always pray for you, that our God may count you worthy of his calling and with his power perform completely all the good that he pleases and every work of faith.
12 This is so that the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you and you in union with him, according to the undeserved kindness of our God and of the Lord Jesus Christ.
2 However, brothers, concerning the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ and our being gathered together to him, we ask you
2 not to be quickly shaken from your reason nor to be alarmed either by an inspired statement or by a spoken message or by a letter appearing to be from us, to the effect that the day of Jehovah is here.
3 Let no one lead you astray in any way, because it will not come unless the apostasy comes first and the man of lawlessness gets revealed, the son of destruction.
4 He stands in opposition and exalts himself above every so-called god or object of worship, so that he sits down in the temple of God, publicly showing himself to be a god.
5 Do you not remember that when I was still with you, I used to tell you these things?
6 And now you know what is acting as a restraint, so that he will be revealed in his own due time.
7 True, the mystery of this lawlessness is already at work, but only until the one who is right now acting as a restraint is out of the way.
8 Then, indeed, the lawless one will be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus will do away with by the spirit of his mouth and bring to nothing by the manifestation of his presence.
9 But the lawless one’s presence is by the operation of Satan with every powerful work and lying signs and wonders
10 and every unrighteous deception for those who are perishing, as a retribution because they did not accept the love of the truth in order that they might be saved.
11 That is why God lets a deluding influence mislead them so that they may come to believe the lie,
12 in order that they all may be judged because they did not believe the truth but took pleasure in unrighteousness.
13 However, we are obligated always to thank God for you, brothers loved by Jehovah, because from the beginning God selected you for salvation by sanctifying you with his spirit and by your faith in the truth.
14 He called you to this through the good news we declare, so that you may acquire the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
15 So, then, brothers, stand firm and maintain your hold on the traditions that you were taught, whether it was by a spoken message or by a letter from us.
16 Moreover, may our Lord Jesus Christ himself and God our Father, who loved us and gave everlasting comfort and good hope by means of undeserved kindness,
17 comfort your hearts and make you firm in every good deed and word.
3 Finally, brothers, carry on prayer for us, that the word of Jehovah may keep spreading rapidly and being glorified, just as it is with you,
2 and that we may be rescued from harmful and wicked men, for faith is not a possession of all people.
3 But the Lord is faithful, and he will strengthen you and protect you from the wicked one.
4 Moreover, we have confidence in the Lord regarding you, that you are carrying out and will go on carrying out our instructions.
5 May the Lord continue to guide your hearts successfully to the love of God and to the endurance for the Christ.
6 Now we are giving you instructions, brothers, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to withdraw from every brother who is walking disorderly and not according to the tradition that you received from us.
7 For you yourselves know how you should imitate us, because we did not behave in a disorderly way among you,
8 nor did we eat anyone’s food free. On the contrary, by labor and toil we were working night and day so as not to impose an expensive burden on any one of you.
9 Not that we do not have authority, but we wanted to offer ourselves as an example for you to imitate.
10 In fact, when we were with you, we used to give you this order: “If anyone does not want to work, neither let him eat.”
11 For we hear that some are walking disorderly among you, not working at all, but meddling with what does not concern them.
12 To such people we give the order and exhortation in the Lord Jesus Christ that they should work quietly and eat food they themselves earn.
13 For your part, brothers, do not give up in doing good.
14 But if anyone is not obedient to our word through this letter, keep this one marked and stop associating with him, so that he may become ashamed.
15 And yet do not consider him an enemy, but continue admonishing him as a brother.
16 Now may the Lord of peace himself give you peace constantly in every way. May the Lord be with all of you.
17 Here is my greeting, Paul’s, in my own hand, which is a sign in every letter; this is the way I write.
18 The undeserved kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ be with all of you.
1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the command of God our Savior and of Christ Jesus, our hope,
2 to Timothy, a genuine child in the faith: May you have undeserved kindness and mercy and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
3 Just as I encouraged you to stay in Ephʹe·sus when I was about to go to Mac·e·doʹni·a, so I do now, in order for you to command certain ones not to teach different doctrine,
4 nor to pay attention to false stories and to genealogies. Such things end up in nothing useful but merely give rise to speculations rather than providing anything from God in connection with faith.
5 Really, the objective of this instruction is love out of a clean heart and out of a good conscience and out of faith without hypocrisy.
6 By deviating from these things, some have been turned aside to meaningless talk.
7 They want to be teachers of law, but they do not understand either the things they are saying or the things they insist on so strongly.
8 Now we know that the Law is fine if one applies it properly,
9 recognizing that law is made, not for a righteous man, but for those who are lawless and rebellious, ungodly and sinners, disloyal and profane, murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, manslayers,
10 sexually immoral people, men who practice homosexuality, kidnappers, liars, perjurers, and everything else that is in opposition to the wholesome teaching
11 according to the glorious good news of the happy God, with which I was entrusted.
12 I am grateful to Christ Jesus our Lord, who imparted power to me, because he considered me faithful by assigning me to a ministry,
13 although formerly I was a blasphemer and a persecutor and an insolent man. Nevertheless, I was shown mercy because I acted in ignorance and with a lack of faith.
14 But the undeserved kindness of our Lord abounded exceedingly along with faith and the love that is in Christ Jesus.
15 This saying is trustworthy and deserving of full acceptance: Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. Of these, I am foremost.
16 Nevertheless, I was shown mercy so that by means of me as the foremost case, Christ Jesus might demonstrate all his patience, making me an example to those who are going to rest their faith on him for everlasting life.
17 Now to the King of eternity, incorruptible, invisible, the only God, be honor and glory forever and ever. Amen.
18 This instruction I entrust to you, my child Timothy, in harmony with the prophecies that were made about you, that by these you may go on waging the fine warfare,
19 holding faith and a good conscience, which some have thrust aside, resulting in the shipwreck of their faith.
20 Hy·me·naeʹus and Alexander are among these, and I have handed them over to Satan so that they may be taught by discipline not to blaspheme.
2 First of all, then, I urge that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and thanksgiving be made concerning all sorts of men,
2 concerning kings and all those who are in high positions, so that we may go on leading a calm and quiet life with complete godly devotion and seriousness.
3 This is fine and acceptable in the sight of our Savior, God,
4 whose will is that all sorts of people should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.
5 For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, a man, Christ Jesus,
6 who gave himself a corresponding ransom for all—this is what is to be witnessed to in its own due time.
7 For the purpose of this witness I was appointed a preacher and an apostle—I am telling the truth, I am not lying—a teacher of nations in the matter of faith and truth.
8 So I desire that in every place the men carry on prayer, lifting up loyal hands, without anger and debates.
9 Likewise, the women should adorn themselves in appropriate dress, with modesty and soundness of mind, not with styles of hair braiding and gold or pearls or very expensive clothing,
10 but in the way that is proper for women professing devotion to God, namely, through good works.
11 Let a woman learn in silence with full submissiveness.
12 I do not permit a woman to teach or to exercise authority over a man, but she is to remain silent.
13 For Adam was formed first, then Eve.
14 Also, Adam was not deceived, but the woman was thoroughly deceived and became a transgressor.
15 However, she will be kept safe through childbearing, provided she continues in faith and love and holiness along with soundness of mind.
3 This statement is trustworthy: If a man is reaching out to be an overseer, he is desirous of a fine work.
2 The overseer should therefore be irreprehensible, a husband of one wife, moderate in habits, sound in mind, orderly, hospitable, qualified to teach,
3 not a drunkard, not violent, but reasonable, not quarrelsome, not a lover of money,
4 a man presiding over his own household in a fine manner, having his children in subjection with all seriousness
5 (for if any man does not know how to preside over his own household, how will he care for the congregation of God?),
6 not a newly converted man, for fear that he might get puffed up with pride and fall into the judgment passed on the Devil.
7 Moreover, he should also have a fine testimony from outsiders so that he does not fall into reproach and a snare of the Devil.
8 Ministerial servants should likewise be serious, not double-tongued, not indulging in a lot of wine, not greedy of dishonest gain,
9 holding the sacred secret of the faith with a clean conscience.
10 Also, let these be tested as to fitness first; then let them serve as ministers, as they are free from accusation.
11 Women should likewise be serious, not slanderous, moderate in habits, faithful in all things.
12 Let ministerial servants be husbands of one wife, presiding in a fine manner over their children and their own households.
13 For the men who minister in a fine manner are acquiring for themselves a fine standing and great freeness of speech in the faith that is in Christ Jesus.
14 I am writing you these things, though I am hoping to come to you shortly,
15 but in case I am delayed, so that you may know how you ought to conduct yourself in God’s household, which is the congregation of the living God, a pillar and support of the truth.
16 Indeed, the sacred secret of this godly devotion is admittedly great: ‘He was made manifest in flesh, was declared righteous in spirit, appeared to angels, was preached about among nations, was believed upon in the world, was received up in glory.’
4 However, the inspired word clearly says that in later times some will fall away from the faith, paying attention to misleading inspired statements and teachings of demons,
2 by means of the hypocrisy of men who speak lies, whose conscience is seared as with a branding iron.
3 They forbid marriage and command people to abstain from foods that God created to be partaken of with thanksgiving by those who have faith and accurately know the truth.
4 For every creation of God is fine, and nothing is to be rejected if it is received with thanksgiving,
5 for it is sanctified through God’s word and prayer over it.
6 By giving this counsel to the brothers, you will be a fine minister of Christ Jesus, one nourished with the words of the faith and of the fine teaching that you have followed closely.
7 But reject irreverent false stories, like those told by old women. On the other hand, train yourself with godly devotion as your aim.
8 For physical training is beneficial for a little, but godly devotion is beneficial for all things, as it holds promise of the life now and the life that is to come.
9 That statement is trustworthy and deserves full acceptance.
10 This is why we are working hard and exerting ourselves, because we have rested our hope on a living God, who is a Savior of all sorts of men, especially of faithful ones.
11 Keep on giving these commands and teaching them.
12 Never let anyone look down on your youth. Instead, become an example to the faithful ones in speaking, in conduct, in love, in faith, in chasteness.
13 Until I come, continue applying yourself to public reading, to exhortation, to teaching.
14 Do not neglect the gift in you that was given you through a prophecy when the body of elders laid their hands on you.
15 Ponder over these things; be absorbed in them, so that your advancement may be plainly seen by all people.
16 Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching. Persevere in these things, for by doing this you will save both yourself and those who listen to you.
6 Let those who are under the yoke of slavery keep on considering their owners worthy of full honor, so that the name of God and the teaching may never be spoken of injuriously.
2 Moreover, let those having believing owners not be disrespectful to them because they are brothers. Rather, they should serve more readily, because those receiving the benefit of their good service are believers and beloved. Keep on teaching these things and giving these exhortations.
3 If any man teaches another doctrine and does not agree with the wholesome instruction, which is from our Lord Jesus Christ, nor with the teaching that is in harmony with godly devotion,
4 he is puffed up with pride and does not understand anything. He is obsessed with arguments and debates about words. These things give rise to envy, strife, slander, wicked suspicions,
5 constant disputes about minor matters by men who are corrupted in mind and deprived of the truth, thinking that godly devotion is a means of gain.
6 To be sure, there is great gain in godly devotion along with contentment.
7 For we have brought nothing into the world, and neither can we carry anything out.
8 So, having food and clothing, we will be content with these things.
9 But those who are determined to be rich fall into temptation and a snare and many senseless and harmful desires that plunge men into destruction and ruin.
10 For the love of money is a root of all sorts of injurious things, and by reaching out for this love some have been led astray from the faith and have stabbed themselves all over with many pains.
11 However, you, O man of God, flee from these things. But pursue righteousness, godly devotion, faith, love, endurance, and mildness.
12 Fight the fine fight of the faith; get a firm hold on the everlasting life for which you were called and you offered the fine public declaration in front of many witnesses.
13 Before God, who preserves all things alive, and Christ Jesus, who as a witness made the fine public declaration before Pontius Pilate, I give you orders
14 to observe the commandment in a spotless and irreprehensible way until the manifestation of our Lord Jesus Christ,
15 which the happy and only Potentate will show in its own appointed times. He is the King of those who rule as kings and Lord of those who rule as lords,
16 the one alone having immortality, who dwells in unapproachable light, whom no man has seen or can see. To him be honor and eternal might. Amen.
17 Instruct those who are rich in the present system of things not to be arrogant, and to place their hope, not on uncertain riches, but on God, who richly provides us with all the things we enjoy.
18 Tell them to work at good, to be rich in fine works, to be generous, ready to share,
19 safely treasuring up for themselves a fine foundation for the future, so that they may get a firm hold on the real life.
20 Timothy, guard what has been entrusted to you, turning away from the empty speeches that violate what is holy and from the contradictions of the falsely called “knowledge.”
21 By making a show of such knowledge, some have deviated from the faith. May the undeserved kindness be with you.
1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by God’s will according to the promise of the life that is through Christ Jesus,
2 to Timothy, a beloved child: May you have undeserved kindness, mercy, and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
3 I am grateful to God, to whom I am rendering sacred service as my forefathers did, and with a clean conscience, never ceasing to remember you in my supplications night and day.
4 As I remember your tears, I am longing to see you, so that I may get filled with joy.
5 For I recall your unhypocritical faith, which dwelled first in your grandmother Loʹis and your mother Euʹnice, but which I am confident is also in you.
6 For this reason I remind you to stir up like a fire the gift of God that is in you through the laying of my hands on you.
7 For God did not give us a spirit of cowardice, but one of power and of love and of soundness of mind.
8 So do not become ashamed either of the witness about our Lord or of me, a prisoner for his sake, but take your part in suffering adversity for the good news by relying on the power of God.
9 He saved us and called us with a holy calling, not because of our works, but because of his own purpose and undeserved kindness. This was given to us in connection with Christ Jesus before times long ago,
10 but now it has been made clearly evident through the manifestation of our Savior, Christ Jesus, who has abolished death and has shed light on life and incorruption through the good news,
11 for which I was appointed a preacher and an apostle and a teacher.
12 This is why I am also suffering these things, but I am not ashamed. For I know the One whom I have believed, and I am confident that he is able to guard what I have laid up in trust with him until that day.
13 Keep holding to the standard of wholesome words that you heard from me with the faith and love that result from union with Christ Jesus.
14 Guard this fine trust by means of the holy spirit, which is dwelling in us.
15 You know this, that all the men in the province of Asia have turned away from me, including Phy·gelʹus and Her·mogʹe·nes.
16 May the Lord grant mercy to the household of On·e·siphʹo·rus, for he often refreshed me, and he did not become ashamed of my prison chains.
17 On the contrary, when he was in Rome, he diligently looked for me and found me.
18 May the Lord grant him to find mercy from Jehovah in that day. And you well know all the services he rendered in Ephʹe·sus.
2 You, therefore, my child, keep on acquiring power in the undeserved kindness that is in Christ Jesus;
2 and the things you heard from me that were supported by many witnesses, these things entrust to faithful men, who, in turn, will be adequately qualified to teach others.
3 As a fine soldier of Christ Jesus, take your part in suffering adversity.
4 No man serving as a soldier involves himself in the commercial businesses of life, in order to gain the approval of the one who enrolled him as a soldier.
5 And even in the games, anyone who competes is not crowned unless he has competed according to the rules.
6 The hardworking farmer must be the first to partake of the fruits.
7 Give constant thought to what I am saying; the Lord will give you understanding in all things.
8 Remember that Jesus Christ was raised up from the dead and was David’s offspring, according to the good news I preach,
9 for which I am suffering and being imprisoned as a criminal. Nevertheless, the word of God is not bound.
10 For this reason I go on enduring all things for the sake of the chosen ones, so that they too may obtain the salvation that is through Christ Jesus, along with everlasting glory.
11 This saying is trustworthy: Certainly if we died together, we will also live together;
12 if we go on enduring, we will also rule together as kings; if we deny, he will also deny us;
13 if we are unfaithful, he remains faithful, for he cannot deny himself.
14 Keep reminding them of these things, instructing them before God not to fight about words, something of no usefulness at all because it harms those listening.
15 Do your utmost to present yourself approved to God, a workman with nothing to be ashamed of, handling the word of the truth aright.
16 But reject empty speeches that violate what is holy, for they will lead to more and more ungodliness,
17 and their word will spread like gangrene. Hy·me·naeʹus and Phi·leʹtus are among them.
18 These men have deviated from the truth, saying that the resurrection has already occurred, and they are subverting the faith of some.
19 Despite that, the solid foundation of God remains standing, having this seal, “Jehovah knows those who belong to him,” and, “Let everyone calling on the name of Jehovah renounce unrighteousness.”
20 Now in a large house there are utensils not only of gold and silver but also of wood and earthenware, and some for an honorable use but others for a use lacking honor.
21 So if anyone keeps clear of the latter ones, he will be an instrument for an honorable use, sanctified, useful to his owner, prepared for every good work.
22 So flee from youthful desires, but pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, along with those who call on the Lord out of a clean heart.
23 Further, reject foolish and ignorant debates, knowing that they produce fights.
24 For a slave of the Lord does not need to fight, but needs to be gentle toward all, qualified to teach, showing restraint when wronged,
25 instructing with mildness those not favorably disposed. Perhaps God may give them repentance leading to an accurate knowledge of truth,
26 and they may come to their senses and escape from the snare of the Devil, seeing that they have been caught alive by him to do his will.
3 But know this, that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here.
2 For men will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, boastful, haughty, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, disloyal,
3 having no natural affection, not open to any agreement, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, without love of goodness,
4 betrayers, headstrong, puffed up with pride, lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God,
5 having an appearance of godliness but proving false to its power; and from these turn away.
6 From among these arise men who slyly work their way into households and captivate weak women loaded down with sins, led by various desires,
7 always learning and yet never able to come to an accurate knowledge of truth.
8 Now in the way that Janʹnes and Jamʹbres opposed Moses, so these also go on opposing the truth. Such men are completely corrupted in mind, disapproved as regards the faith.
9 Nevertheless, they will make no further progress, for their folly will be very plain to all, as it was with those two men.
10 But you have closely followed my teaching, my course of life, my purpose, my faith, my patience, my love, my endurance,
11 the persecutions and sufferings such as I experienced in Antioch, in I·coʹni·um, in Lysʹtra. I endured these persecutions, and the Lord rescued me from them all.
12 In fact, all those desiring to live with godly devotion in association with Christ Jesus will also be persecuted.
13 But wicked men and impostors will advance from bad to worse, misleading and being misled.
14 You, however, continue in the things that you learned and were persuaded to believe, knowing from whom you learned them
15 and that from infancy you have known the holy writings, which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus.
16 All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness,
17 so that the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.
4 I solemnly charge you before God and Christ Jesus, who is to judge the living and the dead, and by his manifestation and his Kingdom:
2 Preach the word; be at it urgently in favorable times and difficult times; reprove, reprimand, exhort, with all patience and art of teaching.
3 For there will be a period of time when they will not put up with the wholesome teaching, but according to their own desires, they will surround themselves with teachers to have their ears tickled.
4 They will turn away from listening to the truth and give attention to false stories.
5 You, though, keep your senses in all things, endure hardship, do the work of an evangelizer, fully accomplish your ministry.
6 For I am already being poured out like a drink offering, and the time for my releasing is imminent.
7 I have fought the fine fight, I have run the race to the finish, I have observed the faith.
8 From this time on, there is reserved for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, will give me as a reward in that day, yet not to me only, but also to all those who have loved his manifestation.
9 Do your utmost to come to me shortly.
10 For Deʹmas has forsaken me because he loved the present system of things, and he has gone to Thes·sa·lo·niʹca, Cresʹcens to Ga·laʹti·a, Titus to Dal·maʹtia.
11 Only Luke is with me. Bring Mark along with you, for he is helpful to me in the ministry.
12 But I have sent Tychʹi·cus off to Ephʹe·sus.
13 When you come, bring the cloak I left at Troʹas with Carpus, and the scrolls, especially the parchments.
14 Alexander the coppersmith did me a great deal of harm. Jehovah will repay him according to his deeds.
15 You too should be on guard against him, for he opposed our message to an excessive degree.
16 In my first defense no one came to my side, but they all forsook me—may they not be held accountable.
17 But the Lord stood near me and infused power into me, so that through me the preaching might be fully accomplished and all the nations might hear it; and I was rescued from the lion’s mouth.
18 The Lord will rescue me from every wicked work and will save me for his heavenly Kingdom. To him be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
19 Give my greetings to Prisʹca and Aqʹui·la and the household of On·e·siphʹo·rus.
20 E·rasʹtus stayed in Corinth, but I left Trophʹi·mus sick at Mi·leʹtus.
21 Do your utmost to arrive before winter. Eu·buʹlus sends you his greetings, and so do Puʹdens and Liʹnus and Clauʹdi·a and all the brothers.
22 The Lord be with the spirit you show. His undeserved kindness be with you.
1 Paul, a slave of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ according to the faith of God’s chosen ones and the accurate knowledge of the truth that is according to godly devotion
2 and is based on a hope of the everlasting life that God, who cannot lie, promised long ago;
3 but in his own due time, he made his word known through the preaching entrusted to me according to the command of our Savior, God;
4 to Titus, a genuine child according to the faith we share: May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Savior.
5 I left you in Crete so that you would correct the things that were defective and make appointments of elders in city after city, as I instructed you:
6 if there is any man free from accusation, a husband of one wife, having believing children who are not accused of debauchery or rebelliousness.
7 For as God’s steward, an overseer must be free from accusation, not self-willed, not quick-tempered, not a drunkard, not violent, not greedy of dishonest gain,
8 but hospitable, a lover of goodness, sound in mind, righteous, loyal, self-controlled,
9 holding firmly to the faithful word as respects his art of teaching, so that he may be able both to encourage by the teaching that is wholesome and to reprove those who contradict.
10 For there are many rebellious men, profitless talkers, and deceivers, especially those who adhere to the circumcision.
11 It is necessary to shut their mouths, because these very men keep on subverting entire households by teaching things they should not for the sake of dishonest gain.
12 A certain one of them, their own prophet, said: “Creʹtans are always liars, injurious wild beasts, idle gluttons.”
13 This witness is true. For this very reason, keep on reproving them with severity so that they may be healthy in the faith,
14 paying no attention to Jewish fables and commandments of men who turn away from the truth.
15 All things are clean to clean people; but to those who are defiled and faithless, nothing is clean, for both their minds and their consciences are defiled.
16 They publicly declare that they know God, but they disown him by their works, because they are detestable and disobedient and not approved for good work of any sort.
2 You, however, keep on speaking what is consistent with wholesome teaching.
2 Let the older men be moderate in habits, serious, sound in mind, healthy in faith, in love, in endurance.
3 Likewise, let the older women be reverent in behavior, not slanderous, not enslaved to a lot of wine, teachers of what is good,
4 so that they may advise the younger women to love their husbands, to love their children,
5 to be sound in mind, chaste, working at home, good, subjecting themselves to their own husbands, so that the word of God may not be spoken of abusively.
6 Likewise, keep on urging the younger men to be sound in mind,
7 showing yourself to be an example of fine works in every way. Teach what is pure with all seriousness,
8 using wholesome speech that cannot be criticized, so that those who oppose may be put to shame, having nothing negative to say about us.
9 Let slaves be in subjection to their owners in all things, trying to please them, not talking back,
10 not stealing from them, but showing complete trustworthiness, so that in every way they may adorn the teaching of our Savior, God.
11 For the undeserved kindness of God has been manifested, bringing salvation to all sorts of people.
12 It trains us to reject ungodliness and worldly desires and to live with soundness of mind and righteousness and godly devotion amid this present system of things,
13 while we wait for the happy hope and glorious manifestation of the great God and of our Savior, Jesus Christ,
14 who gave himself for us to set us free from every sort of lawlessness and to cleanse for himself a people who are his own special possession, zealous for fine works.
15 Keep on speaking these things and exhorting and reproving with full authority. Do not let anyone look down on you.
3 Continue reminding them to be in subjection and to be obedient to governments and authorities, to be ready for every good work,
2 to speak injuriously of no one, not to be quarrelsome, but to be reasonable, displaying all mildness toward all men.
3 For we too were once senseless, disobedient, led astray, being slaves to various desires and pleasures, carrying on in badness and envy, detestable, hating one another.
4 However, when the kindness of our Savior, God, and his love for mankind were manifested
5 (not because of any righteous works we had done, but because of his own mercy), he saved us by means of the bath that brought us to life and by making us new by holy spirit.
6 He poured this spirit out richly on us through Jesus Christ our Savior,
7 so that after being declared righteous through the undeserved kindness of that one, we might become heirs according to a hope of everlasting life.
8 These words are trustworthy, and I want you to keep stressing these matters, so that those who have believed God may keep their minds focused on maintaining fine works. These things are fine and beneficial to men.
9 But have nothing to do with foolish arguments and genealogies and disputes and fights over the Law, for they are unprofitable and futile.
10 As for a man who promotes a sect, reject him after a first and a second admonition,
11 knowing that such a man has deviated from the way and is sinning and is self-condemned.
12 When I send Arʹte·mas or Tychʹi·cus to you, do your utmost to come to me at Ni·copʹo·lis, for that is where I have decided to spend the winter.
13 Carefully supply Zeʹnas, who is versed in the Law, and A·polʹlos so that they may lack nothing for their trip.
14 But let our people also learn to maintain fine works so as to help in cases of urgent need, so that they may not be unproductive.
15 All those with me send you their greetings. Give my greetings to those who have affection for us in the faith. May the undeserved kindness be with all of you.
1 Paul, a prisoner for the sake of Christ Jesus, and Timothy our brother, to Phi·leʹmon our beloved fellow worker,
2 and to Apʹphi·a our sister, and to Ar·chipʹpus our fellow soldier, and to the congregation that is in your house:
3 May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
4 I always thank my God when I mention you in my prayers,
5 as I keep hearing of your faith and the love that you have for the Lord Jesus and for all the holy ones.
6 I pray that your sharing in the faith may move you to acknowledge every good thing that we have through Christ.
7 For I received much joy and comfort on hearing of your love, because the hearts of the holy ones have been refreshed through you, brother.
8 For this very reason, though I have great freeness of speech in connection with Christ to order you to do what is proper,
9 I would rather appeal to you on the basis of love, seeing that I am Paul an older man, yes, now also a prisoner for the sake of Christ Jesus.
10 I am appealing to you for my child, whose father I became while in prison, O·nesʹi·mus.
11 He was formerly useless to you, but now he is useful to you and to me.
12 I am sending him back to you, yes him, my very own heart.
13 I would like to keep him here for myself so that he might take your place in ministering to me during my imprisonment for the sake of the good news.
14 But I do not want to do anything without your consent, so that your good deed may be done, not under compulsion, but of your own free will.
15 Perhaps this is really why he broke away for a short while, so that you may have him back forever,
16 no longer as a slave, but as more than a slave, as a brother who is beloved, especially so to me, but how much more so to you, both in the flesh and in the Lord.
17 So if you consider me a friend, receive him kindly the same way you would me.
18 Moreover, if he did you any wrong or owes you anything, charge it to my account.
19 I, Paul, am writing with my own hand: I will pay it back—not to mention that you owe me even your own self.
20 Yes, brother, may I receive this assistance from you in connection with the Lord; refresh my heart in connection with Christ.
21 I am confident that you will comply, so I am writing you, knowing that you will do even more than what I say.
22 But along with that, also prepare a place for me to stay, for I am hoping that through your prayers I will be given back to you.
23 Sending you greetings is Epʹa·phras, my fellow captive in union with Christ Jesus,
24 also Mark, Ar·is·tarʹchus, Deʹmas, and Luke, my fellow workers.
25 The undeserved kindness of the Lord Jesus Christ be with the spirit you show.
1 Long ago God spoke to our forefathers by means of the prophets on many occasions and in many ways.
2 Now at the end of these days he has spoken to us by means of a Son, whom he appointed heir of all things, and through whom he made the systems of things.
3 He is the reflection of God’s glory and the exact representation of his very being, and he sustains all things by the word of his power. And after he had made a purification for our sins, he sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high.
4 So he has become better than the angels to the extent that he has inherited a name more excellent than theirs.
5 For example, to which one of the angels did God ever say: “You are my son; today I have become your father”? And again: “I will become his father, and he will become my son”?
6 But when he again brings his Firstborn into the inhabited earth, he says: “And let all of God’s angels do obeisance to him.”
7 Also, he says about the angels: “He makes his angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire.”
8 But about the Son, he says: “God is your throne forever and ever, and the scepter of your Kingdom is the scepter of uprightness.
9 You loved righteousness, and you hated lawlessness. That is why God, your God, anointed you with the oil of exultation more than your companions.”
10 And: “At the beginning, O Lord, you laid the foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the works of your hands.
11 They will perish, but you will remain; and just like a garment, they will all wear out,
12 and you will wrap them up just as a cloak, as a garment, and they will be changed. But you are the same, and your years will never come to an end.”
13 But about which of the angels has he ever said: “Sit at my right hand until I place your enemies as a stool for your feet”?
14 Are they not all spirits for holy service, sent out to minister for those who are going to inherit salvation?
2 That is why it is necessary for us to pay more than the usual attention to the things we have heard, so that we never drift away.
2 For if the word spoken through angels proved to be sure, and every transgression and disobedient act received a punishment in harmony with justice,
3 how will we escape if we have neglected so great a salvation? For it began to be spoken through our Lord and was verified for us by those who heard him,
4 while God joined in bearing witness with signs and wonders and various powerful works and with the holy spirit distributed according to his will.
5 For it is not to angels that he has subjected the inhabited earth to come, about which we are speaking.
6 But in one place a certain witness said: “What is man that you keep him in mind, or a son of man that you take care of him?
7 You made him a little lower than angels; you crowned him with glory and honor, and appointed him over the works of your hands.
8 All things you subjected under his feet.” By subjecting all things to him, God left nothing that is not subject to him. Now, though, we do not yet see all things in subjection to him.
9 But we do see Jesus, who was made a little lower than angels, now crowned with glory and honor for having suffered death, so that by God’s undeserved kindness he might taste death for everyone.
10 For it was fitting that the one for whom and through whom all things exist, in bringing many sons to glory, should make the Chief Agent of their salvation perfect through sufferings.
11 For both the one who is sanctifying and those who are being sanctified all stem from one, and for this reason he is not ashamed to call them brothers,
12 as he says: “I will declare your name to my brothers; in the midst of the congregation I will praise you with song.”
13 And again: “I will put my trust in him.” And again: “Look! I and the young children, whom Jehovah gave me.”
14 Therefore, since the “young children” are sharers of blood and flesh, he also similarly shared in the same things, so that through his death he might bring to nothing the one having the means to cause death, that is, the Devil,
15 and that he might set free all those who were held in slavery all their lives by their fear of death.
16 For it is not really angels he is assisting, but he is assisting Abraham’s offspring.
17 Consequently, he had to become like his “brothers” in all respects, so that he could become a merciful and faithful high priest in things relating to God, in order to offer a propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the people.
18 Since he himself has suffered when being put to the test, he is able to come to the aid of those who are being put to the test.
4 Therefore, since a promise of entering into his rest remains, let us be on guard for fear someone among you seems to fall short of it.
2 For we have also had the good news declared to us, just as they had; but the word that they heard did not benefit them, because they were not united by faith with those who listened.
3 For we who have exercised faith do enter into the rest, just as he has said: “So I swore in my anger, ‘They will not enter into my rest,’” although his works were finished from the founding of the world.
4 For in one place he has said of the seventh day as follows: “And God rested on the seventh day from all his works,”
5 and here again he says: “They will not enter into my rest.”
6 Therefore, since it remains for some to enter into it, and those to whom the good news was first declared did not enter in because of disobedience,
7 he again marks off a certain day by saying long afterward in David’s psalm, “Today”; just as it has been said above, “Today if you listen to his voice, do not harden your hearts.”
8 For if Joshua had led them into a place of rest, God would not afterward have spoken of another day.
9 So there remains a sabbath-rest for the people of God.
10 For the man who has entered into God’s rest has also rested from his own works, just as God did from his own.
11 Let us therefore do our utmost to enter into that rest, so that no one may fall into the same pattern of disobedience.
12 For the word of God is alive and exerts power and is sharper than any two-edged sword and pierces even to the dividing of soul and spirit, and of joints from the marrow, and is able to discern thoughts and intentions of the heart.
13 And there is not a creation that is hidden from his sight, but all things are naked and openly exposed to the eyes of the one to whom we must give an account.
14 Therefore, since we have a great high priest who has passed through the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold on to our public declaration of him.
15 For we do not have a high priest who cannot sympathize with our weaknesses, but we have one who has been tested in all respects as we have, but without sin.
16 Let us, then, approach the throne of undeserved kindness with freeness of speech, so that we may receive mercy and find undeserved kindness to help us at the right time.
5 For every high priest taken from among men is appointed in their behalf over the things relating to God, so that he may offer gifts and sacrifices for sins.
2 He is able to deal compassionately with the ignorant and erring ones, since he too is confronted with his own weakness,
3 and because of that he must make offerings for his own sins just as he does for those of the people.
4 A man does not take this honor of his own accord, but he receives it only when he is called by God, just as Aaron was.
5 So, too, the Christ did not glorify himself by becoming a high priest, but was glorified by the One who said to him: “You are my son; today I have become your father.”
6 As he also says in another place, “You are a priest forever in the manner of Mel·chizʹe·dek.”
7 During his life on earth, Christ offered up supplications and also petitions, with strong outcries and tears, to the One who was able to save him out of death, and he was favorably heard for his godly fear.
8 Although he was a son, he learned obedience from the things he suffered.
9 And after he had been made perfect, he became responsible for everlasting salvation to all those obeying him,
10 because he has been designated by God a high priest in the manner of Mel·chizʹe·dek.
11 We have much to say about him, and it is difficult to explain, because you have become dull in your hearing.
12 For although by now you should be teachers, you again need someone to teach you from the beginning the elementary things of the sacred pronouncements of God, and you have gone back to needing milk, not solid food.
13 For everyone who continues to feed on milk is unacquainted with the word of righteousness, for he is a young child.
14 But solid food belongs to mature people, to those who through use have their powers of discernment trained to distinguish both right and wrong.
6 Therefore, now that we have moved beyond the primary doctrine about the Christ, let us press on to maturity, not laying a foundation again, namely, repentance from dead works and faith in God,
2 the teaching on baptisms and the laying on of the hands, the resurrection of the dead and everlasting judgment.
3 And this we will do, if God indeed permits.
4 For as regards those who were once enlightened and who have tasted the heavenly free gift and who have become partakers of holy spirit
5 and who have tasted the fine word of God and powers of the coming system of things,
6 but have fallen away, it is impossible to revive them again to repentance, because they nail the Son of God to the stake again for themselves and expose him to public shame.
7 For the ground receives a blessing from God when it drinks in the rain that frequently falls on it and then produces vegetation useful to those for whom it is cultivated.
8 But if it produces thorns and thistles, it is rejected and is near to being cursed, and in the end it will be burned.
9 But in your case, beloved ones, we are convinced of better things, things related to salvation, even though we are speaking in this way.
10 For God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed for his name by ministering and continuing to minister to the holy ones.
11 But we desire each one of you to show the same industriousness so as to have the full assurance of the hope down to the end,
12 so that you may not become sluggish, but be imitators of those who through faith and patience inherit the promises.
13 For when God made his promise to Abraham, since he could not swear by anyone greater, he swore by himself,
14 saying: “I will surely bless you and I will surely multiply you.”
15 So after Abraham had shown patience, he obtained this promise.
16 For men swear by someone greater, and their oath is the end of every dispute, since it is a legal guarantee to them.
17 In this same way, when God decided to demonstrate more clearly to the heirs of the promise the unchangeableness of his purpose, he guaranteed it with an oath,
18 in order that through two unchangeable things in which it is impossible for God to lie, we who have fled to the refuge may have strong encouragement to take firm hold of the hope set before us.
19 We have this hope as an anchor for the soul, both sure and firm, and it enters in within the curtain,
20 where a forerunner has entered in our behalf, Jesus, who has become a high priest in the manner of Mel·chizʹe·dek forever.
7 For this Mel·chizʹe·dek, king of Saʹlem, priest of the Most High God, met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings and blessed him,
2 and Abraham gave him a tenth of everything. First, his name is translated “King of Righteousness,” and then also king of Saʹlem, that is, “King of Peace.”
3 In being fatherless, motherless, without genealogy, having neither a beginning of days nor an end of life, but being made like the Son of God, he remains a priest for all time.
4 See how great this man was to whom Abraham, the family head, gave a tenth out of the best spoils.
5 True, according to the Law, those of the sons of Leʹvi who receive their priestly office have a commandment to collect tithes from the people, that is, from their brothers, even though these are descendants of Abraham.
6 But this man who did not trace his genealogy from them took tithes from Abraham and blessed the one who had the promises.
7 Now it is undeniable that the lesser one is blessed by the greater.
8 And in the one case, it is men who are dying who receive tithes, but in the other case, it is someone of whom witness is given that he lives.
9 And it could be said that even Leʹvi, who receives tithes, has paid tithes through Abraham,
10 for he was still a future descendant of his forefather when Mel·chizʹe·dek met him.
11 If, then, perfection was attainable through the Levitical priesthood (for it was a feature of the Law that was given to the people), what further need would there be for another priest to arise who is said to be in the manner of Mel·chizʹe·dek and not in the manner of Aaron?
12 For since the priesthood is being changed, it becomes necessary to change the Law as well.
13 For the man about whom these things are said came from another tribe, from which no one has officiated at the altar.
14 For it is clear that our Lord has descended from Judah, yet Moses said nothing about priests coming from that tribe.
15 And this becomes even clearer when another priest arises who is like Mel·chizʹe·dek,
16 who has become such, not by the legal requirement that depends on fleshly descent, but by the power of an indestructible life.
17 For it is said in witness of him: “You are a priest forever in the manner of Mel·chizʹe·dek.”
18 So, then, the former commandment is set aside because it is weak and ineffective.
19 For the Law made nothing perfect, but the introduction of a better hope did, through which we are drawing near to God.
20 Also, inasmuch as this was not done without an oath being sworn
21 (for, indeed, there are men who have become priests without a sworn oath, but this one has become so through an oath sworn respecting him by the One who said: “Jehovah has sworn, and he will not change his mind, ‘You are a priest forever’”),
22 Jesus has accordingly become the guarantee of a better covenant.
23 Furthermore, many had to become priests in succession because death prevented them from continuing as such,
24 but because he continues alive forever, his priesthood has no successors.
25 So he is able also to save completely those who are approaching God through him, because he is always alive to plead for them.
26 For it is fitting for us to have such a high priest who is loyal, innocent, undefiled, separated from the sinners, and exalted above the heavens.
27 Unlike those high priests, he does not need to offer up sacrifices daily, first for his own sins and then for those of the people, because he did this once for all time when he offered himself up.
28 For the Law appoints as high priests men who have weaknesses, but the word of the oath sworn after the Law appoints a son, who has been made perfect forever.
8 Now this is the main point of what we are saying: We have such a high priest as this, and he has sat down at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens,
2 a minister of the holy place and of the true tent, which Jehovah set up, and not man.
3 For every high priest is appointed to offer both gifts and sacrifices; so it was necessary for this one also to have something to offer.
4 If he were on earth, he would not be a priest, since there are already men who offer the gifts according to the Law.
5 These men are offering sacred service in a typical representation and a shadow of the heavenly things; just as Moses, when about to construct the tent, was given the divine command: For He says: “See that you make all things after their pattern that was shown to you in the mountain.”
6 But now Jesus has obtained a more excellent ministry because he is also the mediator of a correspondingly better covenant, which has been legally established on better promises.
7 If that first covenant had been faultless, there would have been no need for a second.
8 For he does find fault with the people when he says: “‘Look! The days are coming,’ says Jehovah, ‘when I will make with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah a new covenant.
9 It will not be like the covenant that I made with their forefathers on the day I took hold of their hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt, because they did not remain in my covenant, so I stopped caring for them,’ says Jehovah.
10 “‘For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days,’ says Jehovah. ‘I will put my laws in their mind, and in their hearts I will write them. And I will become their God, and they will become my people.
11 “‘And they will no longer teach each one his fellow citizen and each one his brother, saying: “Know Jehovah!” For they will all know me, from the least to the greatest of them.
12 For I will be merciful toward their unrighteous deeds, and I will no longer call their sins to mind.’”
13 In his saying “a new covenant,” he has made the former one obsolete. Now what is obsolete and growing old is near to vanishing away.
9 For its part, the former covenant used to have legal requirements for sacred service and its holy place on earth.
2 For a first tent compartment was constructed, in which were the lampstand and the table and the display of the loaves of presentation; and it is called the Holy Place.
3 But behind the second curtain was the tent compartment called the Most Holy.
4 This had a golden censer and the ark of the covenant completely overlaid with gold, in which were the golden jar containing the manna and Aaron’s rod that budded and the tablets of the covenant;
5 and above it were the glorious cherubs overshadowing the propitiatory cover. But now is not the time to speak of these things in detail.
6 After these things were constructed this way, the priests enter the first tent compartment regularly to perform the sacred services;
7 but the high priest enters alone into the second compartment once a year, not without blood, which he offers for himself and for the sins that the people committed in ignorance.
8 Thus the holy spirit makes it clear that the way into the holy place had not yet been revealed while the first tent was standing.
9 This tent is an illustration for the present time, and according to this arrangement, both gifts and sacrifices are offered. However, these are not able to make the conscience of the man doing sacred service perfect.
10 They have to do only with foods and drinks and various ceremonial washings. They were legal requirements concerning the body and were imposed until the appointed time to set things straight.
11 However, when Christ came as a high priest of the good things that have already taken place, he passed through the greater and more perfect tent not made with hands, that is, not of this creation.
12 He entered into the holy place, not with the blood of goats and of young bulls, but with his own blood, once for all time, and obtained an everlasting deliverance for us.
13 For if the blood of goats and of bulls and the ashes of a heifer sprinkled on those who have been defiled sanctifies for the cleansing of the flesh,
14 how much more will the blood of the Christ, who through an everlasting spirit offered himself without blemish to God, cleanse our consciences from dead works so that we may render sacred service to the living God?
15 That is why he is a mediator of a new covenant, in order that because a death has occurred for their release by ransom from the transgressions under the former covenant, those who have been called may receive the promise of the everlasting inheritance.
16 For where there is a covenant, the death of the human covenanter needs to be established,
17 because a covenant is valid at death, since it is not in force as long as the human covenanter is living.
18 Consequently, neither was the former covenant put into effect without blood.
19 For when Moses had spoken every commandment of the Law to all the people, he took the blood of the young bulls and of the goats, with water, scarlet wool, and hyssop, and sprinkled the book and all the people,
20 saying: “This is the blood of the covenant that God has commanded you to keep.”
21 He likewise sprinkled the tent and all the vessels of the holy service with the blood.
22 Yes, according to the Law nearly all things are cleansed with blood, and unless blood is poured out no forgiveness takes place.
23 Therefore, it was necessary for the typical representations of the things in the heavens to be cleansed by these means, but the heavenly things require far better sacrifices.
24 For Christ did not enter into a holy place made with hands, which is a copy of the reality, but into heaven itself, so that he now appears before God on our behalf.
25 This was not done to offer himself often, as when the high priest enters into the holy place from year to year with blood that is not his own.
26 Otherwise, he would have to suffer often from the founding of the world. But now he has manifested himself once for all time at the conclusion of the systems of things to do away with sin through the sacrifice of himself.
27 And just as it is reserved for men to die once for all time, but after this to receive a judgment,
28 so also the Christ was offered once for all time to bear the sins of many; and the second time that he appears it will be apart from sin, and he will be seen by those earnestly looking for him for their salvation.
10 For since the Law has a shadow of the good things to come, but not the very substance of the things, it can never, by the same sacrifices that are continually offered year after year, make those who approach perfect.
2 Otherwise, would not the sacrifices have stopped being offered, because those rendering sacred service once cleansed would have no consciousness of sins anymore?
3 On the contrary, these sacrifices are a reminder of sins year after year,
4 for it is not possible for the blood of bulls and of goats to take sins away.
5 So when he comes into the world, he says: “‘Sacrifice and offering you did not want, but you prepared a body for me.
6 You did not approve of whole burnt offerings and sin offerings.’
7 Then I said: ‘Look! I have come (in the scroll it is written about me) to do your will, O God.’”
8 After first saying: “You did not want nor did you approve of sacrifices and offerings and whole burnt offerings and sin offerings”—sacrifices that are offered according to the Law—
9 then he says: “Look! I have come to do your will.” He does away with what is first in order to establish what is second.
10 By this “will” we have been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all time.
11 Also, every priest takes his station day after day to offer holy service and to make the same sacrifices often, which can never take sins away completely.
12 But this man offered one sacrifice for sins for all time and sat down at the right hand of God,
13 from then on waiting until his enemies should be placed as a stool for his feet.
14 For it is by one sacrificial offering that he has made those who are being sanctified perfect for all time.
15 Moreover, the holy spirit also bears witness to us, for after it has said:
16 “‘This is the covenant that I will make with them after those days,’ says Jehovah. ‘I will put my laws in their hearts, and in their minds I will write them.’”
17 Then it says: “And I will no longer call their sins and their lawless deeds to mind.”
18 Now where there is forgiveness of these, there is no longer an offering for sin.
19 Therefore, brothers, since we have boldness for the way of entry into the holy place by the blood of Jesus,
20 which he opened up for us as a new and living way through the curtain, that is, his flesh,
21 and since we have a great priest over the house of God,
22 let us approach with sincere hearts and complete faith, having had our hearts sprinkled clean from a wicked conscience and our bodies bathed with clean water.
23 Let us hold firmly the public declaration of our hope without wavering, for the one who promised is faithful.
24 And let us consider one another so as to incite to love and fine works,
25 not forsaking our meeting together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you see the day drawing near.
26 For if we practice sin willfully after having received the accurate knowledge of the truth, there is no longer any sacrifice for sins left,
27 but there is a certain fearful expectation of judgment and a burning indignation that is going to consume those in opposition.
28 Anyone who has disregarded the Law of Moses dies without compassion on the testimony of two or three.
29 How much greater punishment do you think a person will deserve who has trampled on the Son of God and who has regarded as of ordinary value the blood of the covenant by which he was sanctified, and who has outraged the spirit of undeserved kindness with contempt?
30 For we know the One who said: “Vengeance is mine; I will repay.” And again: “Jehovah will judge his people.”
31 It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
32 However, keep remembering the former days in which, after you were enlightened, you endured a great struggle along with sufferings.
33 At times you were publicly exposed both to reproaches and to tribulations, and at times you shared with those who were having such an experience.
34 For you expressed sympathy for those in prison and you accepted joyfully the plundering of your belongings, knowing that you yourselves have a better and an enduring possession.
35 Therefore, do not throw away your boldness, which will be richly rewarded.
36 For you need endurance, so that after you have done the will of God, you may receive the fulfillment of the promise.
37 For yet “a very little while,” and “the one who is coming will arrive and will not delay.”
38 “But my righteous one will live by reason of faith,” and “if he shrinks back, I have no pleasure in him.”
39 Now we are not the sort who shrink back to destruction, but the sort who have faith for the preserving of our lives.
11 Faith is the assured expectation of what is hoped for, the evident demonstration of realities that are not seen.
2 For by means of it, the men of ancient times had witness borne to them.
3 By faith we perceive that the systems of things were put in order by God’s word, so that what is seen has come into existence from things that are not visible.
4 By faith Abel offered God a sacrifice of greater worth than that of Cain, and through that faith he received the witness that he was righteous, for God approved his gifts, and although he died, he still speaks through his faith.
5 By faith Eʹnoch was transferred so as not to see death, and he was nowhere to be found because God had transferred him; for before he was transferred he received the witness that he had pleased God well.
6 Moreover, without faith it is impossible to please God well, for whoever approaches God must believe that he is and that he becomes the rewarder of those earnestly seeking him.
7 By faith Noah, after receiving divine warning of things not yet seen, showed godly fear and constructed an ark for the saving of his household; and through this faith he condemned the world, and he became an heir of the righteousness that results from faith.
8 By faith Abraham, when he was called, obeyed by going out to a place he was to receive as an inheritance; he went out, although not knowing where he was going.
9 By faith he lived as a foreigner in the land of the promise as in a foreign land, living in tents with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the very same promise.
10 For he was awaiting the city having real foundations, whose designer and builder is God.
11 By faith also Sarah received power to conceive offspring, even when she was past the age, since she considered Him faithful who made the promise.
12 For this reason, from one man who was as good as dead, there were born children, as many as the stars of heaven in number and as innumerable as the sands by the seaside.
13 In faith all of these died, although they did not receive the fulfillment of the promises; but they saw them from a distance and welcomed them and publicly declared that they were strangers and temporary residents in the land.
14 For those who speak in such a way make it evident that they are earnestly seeking a place of their own.
15 And yet, if they had kept remembering the place from which they had departed, they would have had opportunity to return.
16 But now they are reaching out for a better place, that is, one belonging to heaven. Therefore, God is not ashamed of them, to be called on as their God, for he has prepared a city for them.
17 By faith Abraham, when he was tested, as good as offered up Isaac—the man who had gladly received the promises attempted to offer up his only-begotten son—
18 although it had been said to him: “What will be called your offspring will be through Isaac.”
19 But he reasoned that God was able to raise him up even from the dead, and he did receive him from there in an illustrative way.
20 By faith also Isaac blessed Jacob and Eʹsau concerning things to come.
21 By faith Jacob, when about to die, blessed each of the sons of Joseph and worshipped while leaning on the top of his staff.
22 By faith Joseph, nearing his end, spoke of the exodus of the sons of Israel, and he gave instructions concerning his bones.
23 By faith Moses was hid by his parents for three months after his birth, because they saw that the young child was beautiful and they did not fear the order of the king.
24 By faith Moses, when grown up, refused to be called the son of Pharʹaoh’s daughter,
25 choosing to be mistreated with the people of God rather than to have the temporary enjoyment of sin,
26 because he considered the reproach of the Christ to be riches greater than the treasures of Egypt, for he looked intently toward the payment of the reward.
27 By faith he left Egypt, but not fearing the anger of the king, for he continued steadfast as seeing the One who is invisible.
28 By faith he observed the Passover and the splashing of the blood, so that the destroyer might not harm their firstborn.
29 By faith they passed through the Red Sea as on dry land, but when the Egyptians attempted it, they were swallowed up.
30 By faith the walls of Jerʹi·cho fell down after the people had marched around them for seven days.
31 By faith Raʹhab the prostitute did not perish with those who acted disobediently, because she received the spies in a peaceable way.
32 And what more will I say? For time will fail me if I go on to relate about Gidʹe·on, Baʹrak, Samson, Jephʹthah, David, as well as Samuel and the other prophets.
33 Through faith they defeated kingdoms, brought about righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions,
34 quenched the force of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, from a weak state were made powerful, became mighty in war, routed invading armies.
35 Women received their dead by resurrection, but other men were tortured because they would not accept release by some ransom, in order that they might attain a better resurrection.
36 Yes, others received their trial by mockings and scourgings, indeed, more than that, by chains and prisons.
37 They were stoned, they were tried, they were sawn in two, they were slaughtered by the sword, they went about in sheepskins, in goatskins, while they were in need, in tribulation, mistreated;
38 and the world was not worthy of them. They wandered about in deserts and mountains and caves and dens of the earth.
39 And yet all of these, although they received a favorable witness because of their faith, did not obtain the fulfillment of the promise,
40 because God had foreseen something better for us, so that they might not be made perfect apart from us.
12 So, then, because we have such a great cloud of witnesses surrounding us, let us also throw off every weight and the sin that easily entangles us, and let us run with endurance the race that is set before us,
2 as we look intently at the Chief Agent and Perfecter of our faith, Jesus. For the joy that was set before him he endured a torture stake, despising shame, and has sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.
3 Indeed, consider closely the one who has endured such hostile speech from sinners against their own interests, so that you may not get tired and give up.
4 In your struggle against that sin, you have never yet resisted to the point of having your blood shed.
5 And you have entirely forgotten the exhortation that addresses you as sons: “My son, do not belittle the discipline from Jehovah, nor give up when you are corrected by him;
6 for those whom Jehovah loves he disciplines, in fact, he scourges everyone whom he receives as a son.”
7 You need to endure as part of your discipline. God is treating you as sons. For what son is not disciplined by his father?
8 But if you have not all shared in receiving this discipline, you are really illegitimate children, and not sons.
9 Furthermore, our human fathers used to discipline us, and we gave them respect. Should we not more readily submit ourselves to the Father of our spiritual life and live?
10 For they disciplined us for a short time according to what seemed good to them, but he does so for our benefit so that we may partake of his holiness.
11 True, no discipline seems for the present to be joyous, but it is painful; yet afterward, it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness to those who have been trained by it.
12 Therefore, strengthen the hands that hang down and the feeble knees,
13 and keep making straight paths for your feet, so that what is lame may not be put out of joint but, rather, may be healed.
14 Pursue peace with all people and the sanctification without which no man will see the Lord.
15 Carefully watch that no one fails to obtain the undeserved kindness of God, so that no poisonous root springs up to cause trouble and many are defiled by it;
16 and watch that among you there is no one who is sexually immoral nor anyone who does not appreciate sacred things, like Eʹsau, who gave up his rights as firstborn in exchange for one meal.
17 For you know that afterward when he wanted to inherit the blessing, he was rejected; for although he earnestly tried to bring about a change of mind with tears, it was to no avail.
18 For you have not approached something that can be felt and that has been set aflame with fire, and a dark cloud and thick darkness and a storm,
19 and the blast of a trumpet and the voice speaking words, which on hearing, the people begged that nothing further should be spoken to them.
20 For they could not bear the command: “If even a beast touches the mountain, it must be stoned.”
21 Also, the display was so terrifying that Moses said: “I am afraid and trembling.”
22 But you have approached a Mount Zion and a city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem, and myriads of angels
23 in general assembly, and the congregation of the firstborn who have been enrolled in the heavens, and God the Judge of all, and the spiritual lives of righteous ones who have been made perfect,
24 and Jesus the mediator of a new covenant, and the sprinkled blood, which speaks in a better way than Abel’s blood.
25 See that you do not refuse to listen to the one who is speaking. For if those who refused to listen to the one giving divine warning on earth did not escape, how much more will we not escape if we turn away from him who speaks from the heavens!
26 At that time his voice shook the earth, but now he has promised: “Yet once more I will shake not only the earth but also the heaven.”
27 Now the expression “yet once more” indicates the removal of the things that are shaken, things that have been made, in order that the things not shaken may remain.
28 Therefore, seeing that we are to receive a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, let us continue to receive undeserved kindness, through which we may acceptably offer God sacred service with godly fear and awe.
29 For our God is a consuming fire.
13 Let your brotherly love continue.
2 Do not forget hospitality, for through it some unknowingly entertained angels.
3 Keep in mind those in prison, as though you were imprisoned with them, and those being mistreated, since you yourselves also are in the body.
4 Let marriage be honorable among all, and let the marriage bed be without defilement, for God will judge sexually immoral people and adulterers.
5 Let your way of life be free of the love of money, while you are content with the present things. For he has said: “I will never leave you, and I will never abandon you.”
6 So that we may be of good courage and say: “Jehovah is my helper; I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?”
7 Remember those who are taking the lead among you, who have spoken the word of God to you, and as you contemplate how their conduct turns out, imitate their faith.
8 Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today, and forever.
9 Do not be led astray by various and strange teachings, for it is better for the heart to be strengthened by undeserved kindness than by foods, which do not benefit those occupied with them.
10 We have an altar from which those who offer sacred service at the tent have no authority to eat.
11 For the bodies of those animals whose blood is taken into the holy place as a sin offering by the high priest are burned up outside the camp.
12 Therefore, Jesus also suffered outside the city gate in order to sanctify the people with his own blood.
13 Let us, then, go to him outside the camp, bearing the reproach he bore,
14 for we do not have here a city that remains, but we are earnestly seeking the one to come.
15 Through him let us always offer to God a sacrifice of praise, that is, the fruit of our lips that make public declaration to his name.
16 Moreover, do not forget to do good and to share what you have with others, for God is well-pleased with such sacrifices.
17 Be obedient to those who are taking the lead among you and be submissive, for they are keeping watch over you as those who will render an account, so that they may do this with joy and not with sighing, for this would be damaging to you.
18 Keep praying for us, for we trust we have an honest conscience, as we wish to conduct ourselves honestly in all things.
19 But I especially urge you to pray so that I may be restored to you the sooner.
20 Now may the God of peace, who brought up from the dead the great shepherd of the sheep, our Lord Jesus, with the blood of an everlasting covenant,
21 equip you with every good thing to do his will, working in us through Jesus Christ what is well-pleasing in his sight, to whom be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
22 Now I urge you, brothers, to listen patiently to this word of encouragement, for I have written you a short letter.
23 I want you to know that our brother Timothy has been released. If he comes soon, I will be with him when I see you.
24 Give my greetings to all those who are taking the lead among you and to all the holy ones. Those in Italy send you their greetings.
25 The undeserved kindness be with all of you.
2 My brothers, you are not holding to the faith of our glorious Lord Jesus Christ while showing favoritism, are you?
2 For if a man with gold rings on his fingers and in splendid clothing comes into your meeting, but a poor man in filthy clothing also enters,
3 do you look with favor on the one wearing the splendid clothing and say, “You take this seat here in a fine place,” and do you say to the poor one, “You keep standing” or, “Take that seat there under my footstool”?
4 If so, do you not have class distinctions among yourselves, and have you not become judges rendering wicked decisions?
5 Listen, my beloved brothers. Did not God choose those who are poor from the world’s standpoint to be rich in faith and heirs of the Kingdom, which he promised to those who love him?
6 But you have dishonored the poor. Is it not the rich who oppress you and drag you before law courts?
7 Do they not blaspheme the fine name by which you were called?
8 If, now, you carry out the royal law according to the scripture, “You must love your neighbor as yourself,” you are doing quite well.
9 But if you continue showing favoritism, you are committing sin, and you are convicted by the law as transgressors.
10 For if anyone obeys all the Law but makes a false step in one point, he has become an offender against all of it.
11 For the one who said, “You must not commit adultery,” also said, “You must not murder.” If, now, you do not commit adultery but you do murder, you have become a transgressor of law.
12 Keep on speaking and behaving in such a way as those do who are going to be judged by the law of a free people.
13 For the one who does not practice mercy will have his judgment without mercy. Mercy triumphs over judgment.
14 Of what benefit is it, my brothers, if someone says he has faith but he does not have works? That faith cannot save him, can it?
15 If a brother or a sister is lacking clothing and enough food for the day,
16 yet one of you says to them, “Go in peace; keep warm and well fed,” but you do not give them what they need for their body, of what benefit is it?
17 So, too, faith by itself, without works, is dead.
18 Nevertheless, someone will say: “You have faith, and I have works. Show me your faith without the works, and I will show you my faith by my works.”
19 You believe that there is one God, do you? You are doing quite well. And yet the demons believe and shudder.
20 But do you care to know, O empty man, that faith without works is useless?
21 Was not Abraham our father declared righteous by works after he offered up Isaac his son on the altar?
22 You see that his faith was active along with his works and his faith was perfected by his works,
23 and the scripture was fulfilled that says: “Abraham put faith in Jehovah, and it was counted to him as righteousness,” and he came to be called Jehovah’s friend.
24 You see that a man is to be declared righteous by works and not by faith alone.
25 In the same manner, was not Raʹhab the prostitute also declared righteous by works after she received the messengers hospitably and sent them out by another way?
26 Indeed, just as the body without spirit is dead, so also faith without works is dead.
3 Not many of you should become teachers, my brothers, knowing that we will receive heavier judgment.
2 For we all stumble many times. If anyone does not stumble in word, he is a perfect man, able to bridle also his whole body.
3 If we put bridles in the mouths of horses to make them obey us, we guide also their whole body.
4 Look also at ships: Although they are so big and are driven by strong winds, they are steered by a very small rudder wherever the man at the helm is inclined to go.
5 So, too, the tongue is a small part of the body, and yet it makes great brags. See how small a fire it takes to set a great forest ablaze!
6 The tongue is also a fire. The tongue represents a world of unrighteousness among our body members, for it defiles all the body and sets the whole course of life on fire, and it is set on fire by Ge·henʹna.
7 For every kind of wild animal and bird and reptile and sea creature is to be tamed and has been tamed by humans.
8 But no human can tame the tongue. It is unruly and injurious, full of deadly poison.
9 With it we praise Jehovah, the Father, and yet with it we curse men who have come into existence “in the likeness of God.”
10 Out of the same mouth come blessing and cursing. My brothers, it is not right for things to happen this way.
11 A spring does not cause the fresh water and the bitter water to bubble out of the same opening, does it?
12 My brothers, a fig tree cannot produce olives, or a grapevine figs, can it? Neither can salt water produce fresh water.
13 Who is wise and understanding among you? Let him by his fine conduct demonstrate works performed with a mildness that comes from wisdom.
14 But if you have bitter jealousy and contentiousness in your hearts, do not be bragging and lying against the truth.
15 This is not the wisdom that comes down from above; it is earthly, animalistic, demonic.
16 For wherever there are jealousy and contentiousness, there will also be disorder and every vile thing.
17 But the wisdom from above is first of all pure, then peaceable, reasonable, ready to obey, full of mercy and good fruits, impartial, not hypocritical.
18 Moreover, the fruit of righteousness is sown in peaceful conditions for those who are making peace.
4 What is the source of the wars and fights among you? Do they not originate from your fleshly desires that carry on a conflict within you?
2 You desire, and yet you do not have. You go on murdering and coveting, and yet you are not able to obtain. You go on fighting and waging war. You do not have because of your not asking.
3 When you do ask, you do not receive because you are asking for a wrong purpose, so that you may spend it on your fleshly desires.
4 Adulteresses, do you not know that friendship with the world is enmity with God? Whoever, therefore, wants to be a friend of the world is making himself an enemy of God.
5 Or do you think that for no reason the scripture says: “The spirit that has taken up residence within us keeps enviously longing”?
6 However, the undeserved kindness that He gives is greater. So it says: “God opposes the haughty ones, but he gives undeserved kindness to the humble ones.”
7 Therefore, subject yourselves to God; but oppose the Devil, and he will flee from you.
8 Draw close to God, and he will draw close to you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners, and purify your hearts, you indecisive ones.
9 Give way to misery and mourn and weep. Let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy into despair.
10 Humble yourselves in the eyes of Jehovah, and he will exalt you.
11 Stop speaking against one another, brothers. Whoever speaks against a brother or judges his brother speaks against law and judges law. Now if you judge law, you are not a doer of law but a judge.
12 There is only one who is Lawgiver and Judge, the one who is able to save and to destroy. But you, who are you to be judging your neighbor?
13 Come, now, you who say: “Today or tomorrow we will travel to this city and will spend a year there, and we will do business and make some profit,”
14 whereas you do not know what your life will be like tomorrow. For you are a mist that appears for a little while and then disappears.
15 Instead, you should say: “If Jehovah wills, we will live and do this or that.”
16 But now you take pride in your arrogant boasting. All such boasting is wicked.
17 Therefore, if someone knows how to do what is right and yet does not do it, it is a sin for him.
5 Come, now, you rich men, weep and wail over the miseries that are coming upon you.
2 Your riches have rotted, and your clothing has become moth-eaten.
3 Your gold and silver have rusted away, and their rust will be a witness against you and will consume your flesh. What you have stored up will be like a fire in the last days.
4 Look! The wages you have withheld from the workers who harvested your fields keep crying out, and the cries for help of the reapers have reached the ears of Jehovah of armies.
5 You have lived in luxury and for self-gratification on the earth. You have fattened your hearts on the day of slaughter.
6 You have condemned; you have murdered the righteous one. Is he not opposing you?
7 Be patient then, brothers, until the presence of the Lord. Look! The farmer keeps waiting for the precious fruit of the earth, exercising patience over it until the early rain and the late rain arrive.
8 You too exercise patience; make your hearts firm, because the presence of the Lord has drawn close.
9 Do not grumble against one another, brothers, so that you do not get judged. Look! The Judge is standing before the doors.
10 Brothers, take as a pattern of the suffering of evil and the exercising of patience the prophets who spoke in the name of Jehovah.
11 Look! We consider happy those who have endured. You have heard of the endurance of Job and have seen the outcome Jehovah gave, that Jehovah is very tender in affection and merciful.
12 Above all, my brothers, stop swearing, either by heaven or by earth or by any other oath. But let your “Yes” mean yes and your “No,” no, so that you do not become liable to judgment.
13 Is there anyone suffering hardship among you? Let him carry on prayer. Is there anyone in good spirits? Let him sing psalms.
14 Is there anyone sick among you? Let him call the elders of the congregation to him, and let them pray over him, applying oil to him in the name of Jehovah.
15 And the prayer of faith will make the sick one well, and Jehovah will raise him up. Also, if he has committed sins, he will be forgiven.
16 Therefore, openly confess your sins to one another and pray for one another, so that you may be healed. A righteous man’s supplication has a powerful effect.
17 E·liʹjah was a man with feelings like ours, and yet when he prayed earnestly for it not to rain, it did not rain on the land for three years and six months.
18 Then he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain and the land produced fruit.
19 My brothers, if anyone among you is led astray from the truth and another turns him back,
20 know that whoever turns a sinner back from the error of his way will save him from death and will cover a multitude of sins.
1 Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the temporary residents scattered about in Ponʹtus, Ga·laʹti·a, Cap·pa·doʹci·a, Asia, and Bi·thynʹi·a, to those chosen
2 according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, with sanctification by the spirit, for the purpose of being obedient and sprinkled with the blood of Jesus Christ: May undeserved kindness and peace be increased to you.
3 Praised be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for according to his great mercy he gave us a new birth to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,
4 to an incorruptible and undefiled and unfading inheritance. It is reserved in the heavens for you,
5 who are being safeguarded by God’s power through faith for a salvation ready to be revealed in the last period of time.
6 Because of this you are greatly rejoicing, though for a short time, if it must be, you have been distressed by various trials,
7 in order that the tested quality of your faith, of much greater value than gold that perishes despite its being tested by fire, may be found a cause for praise and glory and honor at the revelation of Jesus Christ.
8 Though you never saw him, you love him. Though you do not see him now, yet you exercise faith in him and are greatly rejoicing with an indescribable and glorious joy,
9 as you attain the goal of your faith, your salvation.
10 Concerning this salvation, the prophets who prophesied about the undeserved kindness meant for you made a diligent inquiry and a careful search.
11 They kept on investigating what particular time or what season the spirit within them was indicating concerning Christ as it testified beforehand about the sufferings meant for Christ and about the glory that would follow.
12 It was revealed to them that they were ministering, not to themselves, but to you, regarding what has now been announced to you by those who declared the good news to you with holy spirit sent from heaven. Into these very things, angels are desiring to peer.
13 So brace up your minds for activity; keep your senses completely; set your hope on the undeserved kindness that will be brought to you at the revelation of Jesus Christ.
14 As obedient children, stop being molded by the desires you formerly had in your ignorance,
15 but like the Holy One who called you, become holy yourselves in all your conduct,
16 for it is written: “You must be holy, because I am holy.”
17 And if you are calling on the Father who judges impartially according to each one’s work, conduct yourselves with fear during the time of your temporary residence.
18 For you know that it was not with corruptible things, with silver or gold, that you were set free from your futile way of life handed down to you by your forefathers.
19 But it was with precious blood, like that of an unblemished and spotless lamb, that of Christ.
20 True, he was foreknown before the founding of the world, but he was made manifest at the end of the times for your sake.
21 Through him you are believers in God, the one who raised him up from the dead and gave him glory, so that your faith and hope might be in God.
22 Now that you have purified yourselves by your obedience to the truth with unhypocritical brotherly affection as the result, love one another intensely from the heart.
23 For you have been given a new birth, not by corruptible, but by incorruptible seed, through the word of the living and enduring God.
24 For “all flesh is like grass, and all its glory is like a blossom of the field; the grass withers, and the flower falls off,
25 but the saying of Jehovah endures forever.” And this “saying” is the good news that was declared to you.
2 So rid yourselves of all badness and deceit and hypocrisy and envy and all backbiting.
2 As newborn infants, form a longing for the unadulterated milk of the word, so that by means of it you may grow to salvation,
3 provided you have tasted that the Lord is kind.
4 As you come to him, a living stone rejected by men but chosen, precious to God,
5 you yourselves as living stones are being built up into a spiritual house to be a holy priesthood, in order to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.
6 For it says in Scripture: “Look! I am laying in Zion a chosen stone, a precious foundation cornerstone, and no one exercising faith in it will ever be disappointed.”
7 It is to you, therefore, that he is precious, because you are believers; but to those not believing, “the stone that the builders rejected, this has become the chief cornerstone”
8 and “a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense.” They are stumbling because they are disobedient to the word. To this very end they were appointed.
9 But you are “a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for special possession, that you should declare abroad the excellencies” of the One who called you out of darkness into his wonderful light.
10 For you were once not a people, but now you are God’s people; once you had not been shown mercy, but now you have received mercy.
11 Beloved, I urge you as foreigners and temporary residents to keep abstaining from fleshly desires, which wage war against you.
12 Maintain your conduct fine among the nations, so that when they accuse you of being wrongdoers, they may be eyewitnesses of your fine works and, as a result, glorify God in the day of his inspection.
13 For the Lord’s sake subject yourselves to every human creation, whether to a king as being superior
14 or to governors as sent by him to punish wrongdoers but to praise those who do good.
15 For it is the will of God that by doing good you may silence the ignorant talk of unreasonable men.
16 Be as free people, using your freedom, not as a cover for doing wrong, but as slaves of God.
17 Honor men of all sorts, have love for the whole association of brothers, be in fear of God, honor the king.
18 Let servants be in subjection to their masters with all due fear, not only to the good and reasonable but also to those hard to please.
19 For it is agreeable when someone endures hardship and suffers unjustly because of conscience toward God.
20 For what merit is there if you are beaten for sinning and you endure it? But if you endure suffering because of doing good, this is an agreeable thing to God.
21 In fact, to this course you were called, because even Christ suffered for you, leaving a model for you to follow his steps closely.
22 He committed no sin, nor was deception found in his mouth.
23 When he was being insulted, he did not insult in return. When he was suffering, he did not threaten, but he entrusted himself to the One who judges righteously.
24 He himself bore our sins in his own body on the stake, so that we might die to sins and live to righteousness. And “by his wounds you were healed.”
25 For you were like sheep going astray, but now you have returned to the shepherd and overseer of your souls.
3 In the same way, you wives, be in subjection to your husbands, so that if any are not obedient to the word, they may be won without a word through the conduct of their wives,
2 because of having been eyewitnesses of your chaste conduct together with deep respect.
3 Do not let your adornment be external—the braiding of hair and the wearing of gold ornaments or fine clothing—
4 but let it be the secret person of the heart in the incorruptible adornment of the quiet and mild spirit, which is of great value in the eyes of God.
5 For this is how the holy women of the past who hoped in God used to adorn themselves, subjecting themselves to their husbands,
6 just as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord. And you have become her children, provided you continue doing good and do not give in to fear.
7 You husbands, in the same way, continue dwelling with them according to knowledge. Assign them honor as to a weaker vessel, the feminine one, since they are also heirs with you of the undeserved favor of life, in order for your prayers not to be hindered.
8 Finally, all of you have unity of mind, fellow feeling, brotherly affection, tender compassion, and humility.
9 Do not pay back injury for injury or insult for insult. Instead, repay with a blessing, for you were called to this course, so that you might inherit a blessing.
10 For “whoever would love life and see good days must guard his tongue from bad and his lips from speaking deception.
11 Let him turn away from what is bad and do what is good; let him seek peace and pursue it.
12 For the eyes of Jehovah are on the righteous, and his ears listen to their supplication, but the face of Jehovah is against those doing bad things.”
13 Indeed, who will harm you if you become zealous for what is good?
14 But even if you should suffer for the sake of righteousness, you are happy. However, do not fear what they fear, nor be disturbed.
15 But sanctify the Christ as Lord in your hearts, always ready to make a defense before everyone who demands of you a reason for the hope you have, but doing so with a mild temper and deep respect.
16 Maintain a good conscience, so that in whatever way you are spoken against, those who speak against you may be put to shame because of your good conduct as followers of Christ.
17 For it is better to suffer because you are doing good, if it is God’s will to allow it, than because you are doing evil.
18 For Christ died once for all time for sins, a righteous person for unrighteous ones, in order to lead you to God. He was put to death in the flesh but made alive in the spirit.
19 And in this state he went and preached to the spirits in prison,
20 who had formerly been disobedient when God was patiently waiting in Noah’s day, while the ark was being constructed, in which a few people, that is, eight souls, were carried safely through the water.
21 Baptism, which corresponds to this, is also now saving you (not by the removing of the filth of the flesh, but by the request to God for a good conscience), through the resurrection of Jesus Christ.
22 He is at God’s right hand, for he went to heaven, and angels and authorities and powers were made subject to him.
4 Since Christ suffered in the flesh, you too arm yourselves with the same mental disposition; because the person who has suffered in the flesh has desisted from sins,
2 so that he may live the remainder of his time in the flesh, no more for the desires of men, but for God’s will.
3 For the time that has passed by is sufficient for you to have done the will of the nations when you carried on in acts of brazen conduct, unbridled passions, overdrinking, wild parties, drinking bouts, and lawless idolatries.
4 They are puzzled that you do not continue running with them in the same decadent course of debauchery, so they speak abusively of you.
5 But these people will render an account to the one who is ready to judge those living and those dead.
6 In fact, this is why the good news was declared also to the dead, so that although they are judged in the flesh from the standpoint of men, they might live in harmony with the spirit from God’s standpoint.
7 But the end of all things has drawn close. Therefore, be sound in mind, and be vigilant with a view to prayers.
8 Above all things, have intense love for one another, because love covers a multitude of sins.
9 Be hospitable to one another without grumbling.
10 To the extent that each one has received a gift, use it in ministering to one another as fine stewards of God’s undeserved kindness that is expressed in various ways.
11 If anyone speaks, let him do so as speaking pronouncements from God; if anyone ministers, let him do so as depending on the strength that God supplies; so that in all things God may be glorified through Jesus Christ. The glory and the might are his forever and ever. Amen.
12 Beloved ones, do not be surprised about the fiery trials that you are experiencing, as though something strange were happening to you.
13 On the contrary, go on rejoicing over the extent to which you are sharers in the sufferings of the Christ, so that you may rejoice and be overjoyed also during the revelation of his glory.
14 If you are being reproached for the name of Christ, you are happy, because the spirit of glory, yes, the spirit of God, is resting upon you.
15 However, let none of you suffer as a murderer or a thief or a wrongdoer or a busybody in other people’s matters.
16 But if anyone suffers as a Christian, let him not feel ashamed, but let him keep on glorifying God while bearing this name.
17 For it is the appointed time for the judgment to start with the house of God. Now if it starts first with us, what will the outcome be for those who are not obedient to the good news of God?
18 “And if the righteous man is being saved with difficulty, what will happen to the ungodly man and the sinner?”
19 So, then, let those who are suffering in harmony with the will of God keep on entrusting themselves to a faithful Creator while they are doing good.
5 Therefore, as a fellow elder, a witness of the sufferings of the Christ and a sharer of the glory that is to be revealed, I make this appeal to the elders among you:
2 Shepherd the flock of God under your care, serving as overseers, not under compulsion, but willingly before God; not for love of dishonest gain, but eagerly;
3 not lording it over those who are God’s inheritance, but becoming examples to the flock.
4 And when the chief shepherd has been made manifest, you will receive the unfading crown of glory.
5 In the same way, you younger men, be in subjection to the older men. But all of you clothe yourselves with humility toward one another, because God opposes the haughty ones, but he gives undeserved kindness to the humble ones.
6 Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty hand of God, so that he may exalt you in due time,
7 while you throw all your anxiety on him, because he cares for you.
8 Keep your senses, be watchful! Your adversary, the Devil, walks about like a roaring lion, seeking to devour someone.
9 But take your stand against him, firm in the faith, knowing that the same kind of sufferings are being experienced by the entire association of your brothers in the world.
10 But after you have suffered a little while, the God of all undeserved kindness, who called you to his everlasting glory in union with Christ, will himself finish your training. He will make you firm, he will make you strong, he will firmly ground you.
11 To him be the might forever. Amen.
12 Through Sil·vaʹnus, whom I regard as a faithful brother, I have written you in few words in order to encourage you and to give an earnest witness that this is the true undeserved kindness of God. Stand firm in it.
13 She who is in Babylon, a chosen one like you, sends you her greetings, and so does Mark, my son.
14 Greet one another with a kiss of love. May all of you who are in union with Christ have peace.
1 Simon Peter, a slave and an apostle of Jesus Christ, to those who have acquired a faith as precious as ours through the righteousness of our God and the Savior Jesus Christ:
2 May undeserved kindness and peace be increased to you by an accurate knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord,
3 for his divine power has granted us all the things that contribute to life and godly devotion through the accurate knowledge of the One who called us by his own glory and virtue.
4 Through these things he has granted us the precious and very grand promises, so that through these you may become sharers in divine nature, having escaped from the world’s corruption produced by wrong desire.
5 For this very reason, put forth all earnest effort to supply to your faith virtue, to your virtue knowledge,
6 to your knowledge self-control, to your self-control endurance, to your endurance godly devotion,
7 to your godly devotion brotherly affection, to your brotherly affection love.
8 For if these things exist in you and overflow, they will prevent you from being either inactive or unfruitful regarding the accurate knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.
9 For anyone lacking these things is blind, shutting his eyes to the light, and has become forgetful of his cleansing from his sins of long ago.
10 Therefore, brothers, be all the more diligent to make your calling and choosing sure for yourselves, for if you keep on doing these things, you will by no means ever fail.
11 In fact, in this way you will be richly granted entrance into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
12 For this reason I intend always to remind you of these things, although you know them and are well-established in the truth that is present in you.
13 But I consider it right, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you with reminders,
14 knowing as I do that my tabernacle is soon to be removed, just as also our Lord Jesus Christ made clear to me.
15 I will always do my utmost so that after my departure, you may be able to recall these things for yourselves.
16 No, it was not by following artfully contrived false stories that we made known to you the power and presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, but rather, we were eyewitnesses of his magnificence.
17 For he received from God the Father honor and glory when words such as these were conveyed to him by the magnificent glory: “This is my Son, my beloved, whom I myself have approved.”
18 Yes, these words we heard coming from heaven while we were with him in the holy mountain.
19 So we have the prophetic word made more sure, and you are doing well in paying attention to it as to a lamp shining in a dark place (until day dawns and a daystar rises) in your hearts.
20 For you know this first, that no prophecy of Scripture springs from any private interpretation.
21 For prophecy was at no time brought by man’s will, but men spoke from God as they were moved by holy spirit.
2 However, there also came to be false prophets among the people, as there will also be false teachers among you. These will quietly bring in destructive sects, and they will even disown the owner who bought them, bringing speedy destruction upon themselves.
2 Furthermore, many will follow their brazen conduct, and because of them the way of the truth will be spoken of abusively.
3 Also, they will greedily exploit you with counterfeit words. But their judgment, decided long ago, is not moving slowly, and their destruction is not sleeping.
4 Certainly God did not refrain from punishing the angels who sinned, but threw them into Tarʹta·rus, putting them in chains of dense darkness to be reserved for judgment.
5 And he did not refrain from punishing an ancient world, but kept Noah, a preacher of righteousness, safe with seven others when he brought a flood upon a world of ungodly people.
6 And by reducing the cities of Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah to ashes, he condemned them, setting a pattern for ungodly people of things to come.
7 And he rescued righteous Lot, who was greatly distressed by the brazen conduct of the lawless people—
8 for day after day that righteous man was tormenting his righteous soul over the lawless deeds that he saw and heard while dwelling among them.
9 So, then, Jehovah knows how to rescue people of godly devotion out of trial, but to reserve unrighteous people to be destroyed on the day of judgment,
10 especially those who seek to defile the flesh of others and who despise authority. Daring and self-willed, they are not afraid to speak abusively of glorious ones,
11 whereas angels, although they are greater in strength and power, do not bring against them an accusation in abusive terms, out of respect for Jehovah.
12 But these men, like unreasoning animals that act on instinct and are born to be caught and destroyed, speak abusively about things of which they are ignorant. They will suffer destruction brought on by their own destructive course,
13 suffering harm as their reward for their own harmful course. They consider it pleasurable to indulge in luxurious living, even in the daytime. They are spots and blemishes who revel in their deceptive teachings while feasting together with you.
14 Their eyes are full of adultery and are unable to desist from sin, and they entice unstable ones. They have a heart trained in greed. They are accursed children.
15 Abandoning the straight path, they have been led astray. They have followed the path of Baʹlaam the son of Beʹor, who loved the reward of wrongdoing,
16 but was reproved for his own violation of what was right. A voiceless beast of burden speaking with a human voice hindered the prophet’s mad course.
17 These are waterless springs and mists driven by a violent storm, and the blackest darkness has been reserved for them.
18 They make high-sounding statements that are empty. By appealing to the desires of the flesh and with acts of brazen conduct, they entice people who have just escaped from those who live in error.
19 While they are promising them freedom, they themselves are slaves of corruption; for if anyone is overcome by someone, he is his slave.
20 Certainly if after escaping from the defilements of the world by an accurate knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they get involved again with these very things and are overcome, their final state has become worse for them than the first.
21 It would have been better for them not to have accurately known the path of righteousness than after knowing it to turn away from the holy commandment they had received.
22 What the true proverb says has happened to them: “The dog has returned to its own vomit, and the sow that was bathed to rolling in the mire.”
3 Beloved ones, this is now the second letter I am writing you in which, as in my first one, I am stirring up your clear thinking faculties by way of a reminder,
2 that you should remember the sayings previously spoken by the holy prophets and the commandment of the Lord and Savior through your apostles.
3 First of all know this, that in the last days ridiculers will come with their ridicule, proceeding according to their own desires
4 and saying: “Where is this promised presence of his? Why, from the day our forefathers fell asleep in death, all things are continuing exactly as they were from creation’s beginning.”
5 For they deliberately ignore this fact, that long ago there were heavens and an earth standing firmly out of water and in the midst of water by the word of God;
6 and that by those means the world of that time suffered destruction when it was flooded with water.
7 But by the same word the heavens and the earth that now exist are reserved for fire and are being kept until the day of judgment and of destruction of the ungodly people.
8 However, do not let this escape your notice, beloved ones, that one day is with Jehovah as a thousand years and a thousand years as one day.
9 Jehovah is not slow concerning his promise, as some people consider slowness, but he is patient with you because he does not desire anyone to be destroyed but desires all to attain to repentance.
10 But Jehovah’s day will come as a thief, in which the heavens will pass away with a roar, but the elements being intensely hot will be dissolved, and earth and the works in it will be exposed.
11 Since all these things are to be dissolved in this way, consider what sort of people you ought to be in holy acts of conduct and deeds of godly devotion,
12 as you await and keep close in mind the presence of the day of Jehovah, through which the heavens will be destroyed in flames and the elements will melt in the intense heat!
13 But there are new heavens and a new earth that we are awaiting according to his promise, and in these righteousness is to dwell.
14 Therefore, beloved ones, since you are awaiting these things, do your utmost to be found finally by him spotless and unblemished and in peace.
15 Furthermore, consider the patience of our Lord as salvation, just as our beloved brother Paul also wrote you according to the wisdom given him,
16 speaking about these things as he does in all his letters. However, some things in them are hard to understand, and these things the ignorant and unstable are twisting, as they do also the rest of the Scriptures, to their own destruction.
17 You, therefore, beloved ones, having this advance knowledge, be on your guard so that you may not be led astray with them by the error of the lawless people and fall from your own steadfastness.
18 No, but go on growing in the undeserved kindness and knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To him be the glory both now and to the day of eternity. Amen.
1 That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have observed and our hands have felt, concerning the word of life,
2 (yes, the life was made manifest, and we have seen and are bearing witness and reporting to you the everlasting life that was with the Father and was made manifest to us),
3 that which we have seen and heard we are reporting also to you, so that you too may have fellowship with us. And this fellowship of ours is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ.
4 And we are writing these things so that our joy may be complete.
5 This is the message that we heard from him and are announcing to you: God is light, and there is no darkness at all in him.
6 If we make the statement, “We are having fellowship with him,” and yet we go on walking in the darkness, we are lying and are not practicing the truth.
7 However, if we are walking in the light as he himself is in the light, we do have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus his Son cleanses us from all sin.
8 If we make the statement, “We have no sin,” we are misleading ourselves and the truth is not in us.
9 If we confess our sins, he is faithful and righteous so as to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
10 If we make the statement, “We have not sinned,” we are making him a liar, and his word is not in us.
2 My little children, I am writing you these things so that you may not commit a sin. And yet, if anyone does commit a sin, we have a helper with the Father, Jesus Christ, a righteous one.
2 And he is a propitiatory sacrifice for our sins, yet not for ours only but also for the whole world’s.
3 And by this we realize that we have come to know him, namely, if we continue observing his commandments.
4 The one who says, “I have come to know him,” and yet does not observe his commandments is a liar, and the truth is not in this person.
5 But whoever does observe his word, in this person the love of God has truly been made perfect. By this we know that we are in union with him.
6 The one who says he remains in union with him is himself under obligation to go on walking just as that one walked.
7 Beloved ones, I am writing you, not a new commandment, but an old commandment that you have had from the beginning. This old commandment is the word that you heard.
8 Again, I am writing you a new commandment, which is true in his case and in yours, because the darkness is passing away and the true light is already shining.
9 The one who says that he is in the light and yet hates his brother is still in the darkness.
10 The one who loves his brother remains in the light, and in him there is no cause for stumbling.
11 But the one who hates his brother is in the darkness and is walking in the darkness, and he does not know where he is going, because the darkness has blinded his eyes.
12 I am writing you, little children, because your sins have been forgiven you for the sake of his name.
13 I am writing you, fathers, because you have come to know him who is from the beginning. I am writing you, young men, because you have conquered the wicked one. I write you, young children, because you have come to know the Father.
14 I write you, fathers, because you have come to know him who is from the beginning. I write you, young men, because you are strong and the word of God remains in you and you have conquered the wicked one.
15 Do not love either the world or the things in the world. If anyone loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him;
16 because everything in the world—the desire of the flesh and the desire of the eyes and the showy display of one’s means of life—does not originate with the Father, but originates with the world.
17 Furthermore, the world is passing away and so is its desire, but the one who does the will of God remains forever.
18 Young children, it is the last hour, and just as you have heard that the antichrist is coming, even now many antichrists have appeared, from which fact we know that it is the last hour.
19 They went out from us, but they were not of our sort; for if they had been of our sort, they would have remained with us. But they went out so that it might be shown that not all are of our sort.
20 And you have an anointing from the holy one, and all of you have knowledge.
21 I write you, not because you do not know the truth, but because you know it, and because no lie originates with the truth.
22 Who is the liar but the one who denies that Jesus is the Christ? This is the antichrist, the one who denies the Father and the Son.
23 Everyone who denies the Son does not have the Father either. But whoever acknowledges the Son has the Father also.
24 As for you, what you have heard from the beginning must remain in you. If what you have heard from the beginning remains in you, you will also remain in union with the Son and in union with the Father.
25 Furthermore, this is what he himself promised us—the life everlasting.
26 I write you these things about those who are trying to mislead you.
27 And as for you, the anointing that you received from him remains in you, and you do not need anyone to be teaching you; but the anointing from him is teaching you about all things and is true and is no lie. Just as it has taught you, remain in union with him.
28 So now, little children, remain in union with him, so that when he is made manifest we may have freeness of speech and not shrink away from him in shame at his presence.
29 If you know that he is righteous, you also know that everyone who practices righteousness has been born from him.
3 See what sort of love the Father has given us, that we should be called children of God! And that is what we are. That is why the world does not know us, because it has not come to know him.
2 Beloved ones, we are now children of God, but it has not yet been made manifest what we will be. We do know that when he is made manifest we will be like him, because we will see him just as he is.
3 And everyone who has this hope in him purifies himself, just as that one is pure.
4 Everyone who practices sin is also practicing lawlessness, and sin is lawlessness.
5 You know, too, that he was made manifest to take away our sins, and there is no sin in him.
6 Everyone remaining in union with him does not practice sin; no one who practices sin has either seen him or come to know him.
7 Little children, let no one mislead you; the one who practices righteousness is righteous, just as that one is righteous.
8 The one who practices sin originates with the Devil, because the Devil has been sinning from the beginning. For this purpose the Son of God was made manifest, to break up the works of the Devil.
9 Everyone who has been born from God does not practice sin, for His seed remains in such one, and he cannot practice sin, for he has been born from God.
10 The children of God and the children of the Devil are evident by this fact: Whoever does not practice righteousness does not originate with God, nor does the one who does not love his brother.
11 For this is the message that you have heard from the beginning, that we should love one another;
12 not like Cain, who originated with the wicked one and slaughtered his brother. And for what reason did he slaughter him? Because his own works were wicked, but those of his brother were righteous.
13 Do not be surprised, brothers, that the world hates you.
14 We know that we have passed over from death to life, because we love the brothers. The one who does not love remains in death.
15 Everyone who hates his brother is a murderer, and you know that no murderer has everlasting life remaining in him.
16 By this we have come to know love, because that one surrendered his life for us, and we are under obligation to surrender our lives for our brothers.
17 But whoever has the material possessions of this world and sees his brother in need and yet refuses to show him compassion, in what way does the love of God remain in him?
18 Little children, we should love, not in word or with the tongue, but in deed and truth.
19 By this we will know that we originate with the truth, and we will assure our hearts before him
20 regarding whatever our hearts may condemn us in, because God is greater than our hearts and knows all things.
21 Beloved ones, if our hearts do not condemn us, we have freeness of speech toward God;
22 and whatever we ask we receive from him, because we are observing his commandments and doing what is pleasing in his eyes.
23 Indeed, this is his commandment: that we have faith in the name of his Son Jesus Christ and love one another, just as he gave us a commandment.
24 Moreover, the one who observes his commandments remains in union with him, and he in union with such one. And by the spirit that he gave us, we know that he remains in union with us.
4 Beloved ones, do not believe every inspired statement, but test the inspired statements to see whether they originate with God, for many false prophets have gone out into the world.
2 This is how you know that the inspired statement is from God: Every inspired statement that acknowledges Jesus Christ as having come in the flesh originates with God.
3 But every inspired statement that does not acknowledge Jesus does not originate with God. Furthermore, this is the antichrist’s inspired statement that you have heard was coming, and now it is already in the world.
4 You originate with God, little children, and you have conquered them, because the one who is in union with you is greater than the one who is in union with the world.
5 They originate with the world; that is why they speak what originates with the world and the world listens to them.
6 We originate with God. Whoever comes to know God listens to us; whoever does not originate with God does not listen to us. By this we distinguish the inspired statement of truth from the inspired statement of error.
7 Beloved ones, let us continue loving one another, because love is from God, and everyone who loves has been born from God and knows God.
8 Whoever does not love has not come to know God, because God is love.
9 By this the love of God was revealed in our case, that God sent his only-begotten Son into the world so that we might gain life through him.
10 The love is in this respect, not that we have loved God, but that he loved us and sent his Son as a propitiatory sacrifice for our sins.
11 Beloved ones, if this is how God loved us, then we are also under obligation to love one another.
12 No one has seen God at any time. If we continue loving one another, God remains in us and his love is made perfect in us.
13 By this we know that we are remaining in union with him and he in union with us, because he has given his spirit to us.
14 In addition, we ourselves have seen and are bearing witness that the Father has sent his Son as Savior of the world.
15 Whoever acknowledges that Jesus is God’s Son, God remains in union with such one and he in union with God.
16 And we have come to know and believe the love that God has for us. God is love, and the one who remains in love remains in union with God and God remains in union with him.
17 In this way love has been made perfect in us, so that we may have freeness of speech in the day of judgment, because just as that one is, so are we ourselves in this world.
18 There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts fear out, because fear restrains us. Indeed, the one who is fearful has not been made perfect in love.
19 We love, because he first loved us.
20 If anyone says, “I love God,” and yet is hating his brother, he is a liar. For the one who does not love his brother, whom he has seen, cannot love God, whom he has not seen.
21 And we have this commandment from him, that whoever loves God must also love his brother.
5 Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ has been born from God, and everyone who loves the one who caused to be born loves him who has been born from that one.
2 By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God and carry out his commandments.
3 For this is what the love of God means, that we observe his commandments; and yet his commandments are not burdensome,
4 because everyone who has been born from God conquers the world. And this is the conquest that has conquered the world, our faith.
5 Who can conquer the world? Is it not the one who has faith that Jesus is the Son of God?
6 This is the one who came by means of water and blood, Jesus Christ, not with the water only, but with the water and with the blood. And the spirit is bearing witness, because the spirit is the truth.
7 For there are three witness bearers:
8 the spirit and the water and the blood; and the three are in agreement.
9 If we accept the witness of men, the witness of God is greater. Because this is the witness God gives, the witness that he has given about his Son.
10 The person putting his faith in the Son of God has the witness within himself. The person not having faith in God has made him a liar, because he has not put his faith in the witness given by God concerning his Son.
11 And this is the witness, that God gave us everlasting life, and this life is in his Son.
12 The one who has the Son has this life; the one who does not have the Son of God does not have this life.
13 I write you these things so that you may know that you have life everlasting, you who put your faith in the name of the Son of God.
14 And this is the confidence that we have toward him, that no matter what we ask according to his will, he hears us.
15 And if we know that he hears us concerning whatever we are asking, we know that we are to have the things we ask for, since we have asked them of him.
16 If anyone catches sight of his brother committing a sin that does not incur death, he will ask, and God will give life to him, yes, to those not committing sin that incurs death. There is a sin that does incur death. It is concerning that sin that I do not tell him to make request.
17 All unrighteousness is sin, and yet there is a sin that does not incur death.
18 We know that everyone who has been born from God does not practice sin, but the one born from God watches him, and the wicked one cannot take hold of him.
19 We know that we originate with God, but the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one.
20 But we know that the Son of God has come, and he has given us insight so that we may gain the knowledge of the one who is true. And we are in union with the one who is true, by means of his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God and life everlasting.
21 Little children, guard yourselves from idols.
1 The older man to the chosen lady and to her children, whom I truly love, and not only I but also all those who have come to know the truth,
2 because of the truth that remains in us and will be with us forever.
3 There will be with us undeserved kindness, mercy, and peace from God the Father and from Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, with truth and love.
4 I rejoice very much because I have found some of your children walking in the truth, just as we received commandment from the Father.
5 So now I request you, lady, that we love one another. (I am writing you, not a new commandment, but one that we had from the beginning.)
6 And this is what love means, that we go on walking according to his commandments. This is the commandment, just as you have heard from the beginning, that you should go on walking in it.
7 For many deceivers have gone out into the world, those not acknowledging Jesus Christ as coming in the flesh. This is the deceiver and the antichrist.
8 Look out for yourselves, so that you do not lose the things we have worked to produce, but that you may obtain a full reward.
9 Everyone who pushes ahead and does not remain in the teaching of the Christ does not have God. The one who does remain in this teaching is the one who has both the Father and the Son.
10 If anyone comes to you and does not bring this teaching, do not receive him into your homes or say a greeting to him.
11 For the one who says a greeting to him is a sharer in his wicked works.
12 Although I have many things to write to you, I do not want to do so with paper and ink, but I am hoping to come to you and to speak with you face-to-face, so that your joy may be in full measure.
13 The children of your sister, the chosen one, send you their greetings.
1 The older man to Gaʹius, the beloved, whom I truly love.
2 Beloved one, I pray that in all things you continue to prosper and enjoy good health, just as you are now prospering.
3 For I rejoiced very much when brothers came and bore witness about the truth you hold, as you go on walking in the truth.
4 No greater joy do I have than this: that I should hear that my children go on walking in the truth.
5 Beloved one, you show your faithfulness in what you do for the brothers, even though they are strangers to you.
6 They have given a witness about your love before the congregation. Please send them on their way in a manner worthy of God.
7 For it was in behalf of his name that they went out, not taking anything from the people of the nations.
8 So we are under obligation to show hospitality to such ones, so that we may become fellow workers in the truth.
9 I wrote something to the congregation, but Di·otʹre·phes, who likes to have the first place among them, does not accept anything from us with respect.
10 That is why if I come, I will call attention to the works he is doing in spreading malicious talk about us. Not being content with this, he refuses to welcome the brothers with respect; and those who want to welcome them, he tries to hinder and to throw out of the congregation.
11 Beloved one, do not imitate what is bad, but imitate what is good. The one who does good originates with God. The one who does bad has not seen God.
12 De·meʹtri·us has been well-reported-on by them all and by the truth itself. In fact, we too are bearing witness about him, and you know that the witness we give is true.
13 I had many things to write you, but I do not wish to go on writing you with pen and ink.
14 However, I am hoping to see you soon, and we will speak face-to-face. May you have peace. The friends send you their greetings. Give my greetings to the friends by name.
1 Jude, a slave of Jesus Christ, but a brother of James, to the called ones who are loved by God the Father and preserved for Jesus Christ:
2 May mercy and peace and love be increased to you.
3 Beloved ones, although I was making every effort to write you about the salvation we hold in common, I found it necessary to write you to urge you to put up a hard fight for the faith that was once for all time delivered to the holy ones.
4 My reason is that certain men have slipped in among you who were long ago appointed to this judgment by the Scriptures; they are ungodly men who turn the undeserved kindness of our God into an excuse for brazen conduct and who prove false to our only owner and Lord, Jesus Christ.
5 Although you are fully aware of all of this, I want to remind you that Jehovah, having saved a people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed those not showing faith.
6 And the angels who did not keep their original position but forsook their own proper dwelling place, he has reserved with eternal bonds in dense darkness for the judgment of the great day.
7 In the same manner, Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah and the cities around them also gave themselves over to gross sexual immorality and pursued unnatural fleshly desires; they are placed before us as a warning example by undergoing the judicial punishment of everlasting fire.
8 Despite this, these men too are indulging in dreams, defiling the flesh, despising authority, and speaking abusively of glorious ones.
9 But when Miʹcha·el the archangel had a difference with the Devil and was disputing about Moses’ body, he did not dare to bring a judgment against him in abusive terms, but said: “May Jehovah rebuke you.”
10 But these men are speaking abusively about all the things they really do not understand. And in all the things that they do understand by instinct like unreasoning animals, they go on corrupting themselves.
11 Too bad for them, for they have followed the path of Cain and have rushed into the erroneous course of Baʹlaam for reward, and they have perished in the rebellious talk of Korʹah!
12 These are the rocks hidden below water at your love feasts while they feast with you, shepherds who feed themselves without fear; waterless clouds carried here and there by the wind; fruitless trees in late autumn, having died twice and having been uprooted;
13 wild waves of the sea that cast up the foam of their own shame; stars with no set course, for which the blackest darkness stands reserved forever.
14 Yes, the seventh one in line from Adam, Eʹnoch, also prophesied about them when he said: “Look! Jehovah came with his holy myriads
15 to execute judgment against all, and to convict all the ungodly concerning all their ungodly deeds that they did in an ungodly way, and concerning all the shocking things that ungodly sinners spoke against him.”
16 These men are murmurers, complainers about their lot in life, following their own desires, and their mouths make grandiose boasts, while they are flattering others for their own benefit.
17 As for you, beloved ones, call to mind the sayings that have been previously spoken by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ,
18 how they used to say to you: “In the last time there will be ridiculers, following their own desires for ungodly things.”
19 These are the ones who cause divisions, animalistic men, not having spirituality.
20 But you, beloved ones, build yourselves up on your most holy faith, and pray with holy spirit,
21 in order to keep yourselves in God’s love, while you await the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ with everlasting life in view.
22 Also, continue showing mercy to some who have doubts;
23 save them by snatching them out of the fire. But continue showing mercy to others, doing so with fear, while you hate even the garment that has been stained by the flesh.
24 Now to the one who is able to guard you from stumbling and to make you stand unblemished in the sight of his glory with great joy,
25 to the only God our Savior through Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory, majesty, might, and authority for all past eternity and now and into all eternity. Amen.
1 A revelation by Jesus Christ, which God gave him, to show his slaves the things that must shortly take place. And he sent his angel and presented it in signs through him to his slave John,
2 who bore witness to the word God gave and to the witness Jesus Christ gave, yes, to all the things he saw.
3 Happy is the one who reads aloud and those who hear the words of this prophecy and who observe the things written in it, for the appointed time is near.
4 John to the seven congregations that are in the province of Asia: May you have undeserved kindness and peace from “the One who is and who was and who is coming,” and from the seven spirits that are before his throne,
5 and from Jesus Christ, “the Faithful Witness,” “the firstborn from the dead,” and “the Ruler of the kings of the earth.” To him who loves us and who set us free from our sins by means of his own blood—
6 and he made us to be a kingdom, priests to his God and Father—yes, to him be the glory and the might forever. Amen.
7 Look! He is coming with the clouds, and every eye will see him, and those who pierced him; and all the tribes of the earth will beat themselves in grief because of him. Yes, Amen.
8 “I am the Alʹpha and the O·meʹga,” says Jehovah God, “the One who is and who was and who is coming, the Almighty.”
9 I John, your brother and a sharer with you in the tribulation and kingdom and endurance in association with Jesus, was on the island called Patʹmos for speaking about God and bearing witness concerning Jesus.
10 By inspiration I came to be in the Lord’s day, and I heard behind me a strong voice like that of a trumpet,
11 saying: “What you see, write in a scroll and send it to the seven congregations: in Ephʹe·sus, in Smyrʹna, in Perʹga·mum, in Thy·a·tiʹra, in Sarʹdis, in Philadelphia, and in La·o·di·ceʹa.”
12 I turned to see who was speaking with me, and when I turned, I saw seven golden lampstands,
13 and in the midst of the lampstands someone like a son of man, clothed in a garment that reached down to the feet and wearing a golden sash around his chest.
14 Moreover, his head and his hair were white as white wool, as snow, and his eyes were like a fiery flame,
15 and his feet were like fine copper when glowing in a furnace, and his voice was like the sound of many waters.
16 And he had in his right hand seven stars, and out of his mouth a sharp, long, two-edged sword was protruding, and his countenance was like the sun when it shines at its brightest.
17 When I saw him, I fell as dead at his feet. And he laid his right hand on me and said: “Do not be afraid. I am the First and the Last,
18 and the living one, and I became dead, but look! I am living forever and ever, and I have the keys of death and of the Grave.
19 So write down the things you saw, and the things that are, and the things that will take place after these.
20 As for the sacred secret of the seven stars that you saw in my right hand and of the seven golden lampstands: The seven stars mean the angels of the seven congregations, and the seven lampstands mean the seven congregations.
2 “To the angel of the congregation in Ephʹe·sus write: These are the things that he says who holds the seven stars in his right hand and walks among the seven golden lampstands:
2 ‘I know your deeds, and your labor and endurance, and that you cannot tolerate bad men, and that you put to the test those who say they are apostles, but they are not, and you found them to be liars.
3 You are also showing endurance, and you have persevered for the sake of my name and have not grown weary.
4 Nevertheless, I hold this against you, that you have left the love you had at first.
5 “‘Therefore remember from where you have fallen, and repent and do the deeds you did at first. If you do not, I will come to you, and I will remove your lampstand from its place, unless you repent.
6 Still, you do have this in your favor: that you hate the deeds of the sect of Nic·o·laʹus, which I also hate.
7 Let the one who has an ear hear what the spirit says to the congregations: To the one who conquers I will grant to eat of the tree of life, which is in the paradise of God.’
8 “And to the angel of the congregation in Smyrʹna write: These are the things that he says, ‘the First and the Last,’ who became dead and came to life again:
9 ‘I know your tribulation and poverty—but you are rich—and the blasphemy by those who call themselves Jews and really are not, but they are a synagogue of Satan.
10 Do not be afraid of the things you are about to suffer. Look! The Devil will keep on throwing some of you into prison so that you may be fully put to the test, and you will have tribulation for ten days. Prove yourself faithful even to death, and I will give you the crown of life.
11 Let the one who has an ear hear what the spirit says to the congregations: The one who conquers will by no means be harmed by the second death.’
12 “To the angel of the congregation in Perʹga·mum write: These are the things that he says who has the sharp, long, two-edged sword:
13 ‘I know where you are dwelling, that is, where the throne of Satan is; and yet you keep holding fast to my name, and you did not deny your faith in me even in the days of Anʹti·pas, my faithful witness, who was killed by your side, where Satan is dwelling.
14 “‘Nevertheless, I have a few things against you, that you have there those adhering to the teaching of Baʹlaam, who taught Baʹlak to put a stumbling block before the sons of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to idols and to commit sexual immorality.
15 In the same way, you also have those adhering to the teaching of the sect of Nic·o·laʹus.
16 So repent. If you do not, I am coming to you quickly, and I will war against them with the long sword of my mouth.
17 “‘Let the one who has an ear hear what the spirit says to the congregations: To the one who conquers I will give some of the hidden manna, and I will give him a white pebble, and written on the pebble is a new name that no one knows except the one receiving it.’
18 “To the angel of the congregation in Thy·a·tiʹra write: These are the things that the Son of God says, the one who has eyes like a fiery flame and whose feet are like fine copper:
19 ‘I know your deeds, and your love and faith and ministry and endurance, and that your deeds of late are more than those you did at first.
20 “‘Nevertheless, I do hold this against you, that you tolerate that woman Jezʹe·bel, who calls herself a prophetess, and she teaches and misleads my slaves to commit sexual immorality and to eat things sacrificed to idols.
21 And I gave her time to repent, but she is not willing to repent of her sexual immorality.
22 Look! I am about to throw her into a sickbed, and those committing adultery with her into great tribulation, unless they repent of her deeds.
23 And I will kill her children with deadly plague, so that all the congregations will know that I am the one who searches the innermost thoughts and hearts, and I will give to you individually according to your deeds.
24 “‘However, I say to the rest of you who are in Thy·a·tiʹra, all those who do not follow this teaching, those who did not get to know the so-called “deep things of Satan”: I am not putting on you any other burden.
25 Just the same, hold fast to what you have until I come.
26 And to the one who conquers and observes my deeds down to the end, I will give authority over the nations,
27 and he will shepherd the people with an iron rod so that they will be broken to pieces like clay vessels, just as I have received from my Father.
28 And I will give him the morning star.
29 Let the one who has an ear hear what the spirit says to the congregations.’
3 “To the angel of the congregation in Sarʹdis write: These are the things that he says who has the seven spirits of God and the seven stars: ‘I know your deeds, that you have the name that you are alive, but you are dead.
2 Become watchful, and strengthen the things remaining that were ready to die, for I have not found your works fully performed before my God.
3 Therefore, continue mindful of how you have received and how you heard, and go on keeping it, and repent. Certainly unless you wake up, I will come as a thief, and you will not know at all at what hour I will come upon you.
4 “‘Nevertheless, you do have a few individuals in Sarʹdis who did not defile their garments, and they will walk with me in white ones, because they are worthy.
5 The one who conquers will thus be dressed in white garments, and I will by no means blot out his name from the book of life, but I will acknowledge his name before my Father and before his angels.
6 Let the one who has an ear hear what the spirit says to the congregations.’
7 “To the angel of the congregation in Philadelphia write: These are the things he says who is holy, who is true, who has the key of David, who opens so that no one will shut and shuts so that no one opens:
8 ‘I know your deeds—look! I have set before you an opened door, which no one can shut. And I know that you have a little power, and you kept my word and did not prove false to my name.
9 Look! I will make those from the synagogue of Satan who say they are Jews yet are not, but are lying—look! I will make them come and bow before your feet and make them know that I have loved you.
10 Because you kept the word about my endurance, I will also keep you from the hour of test, which is to come upon the entire inhabited earth, to put to the test those dwelling on the earth.
11 I am coming quickly. Keep holding fast to what you have, so that no one may take your crown.
12 “‘The one who conquers—I will make him a pillar in the temple of my God, and he will by no means go out from it anymore, and I will write upon him the name of my God and the name of the city of my God, the New Jerusalem that descends out of heaven from my God, and my own new name.
13 Let the one who has an ear hear what the spirit says to the congregations.’
14 “To the angel of the congregation in La·o·di·ceʹa write: These are the things that the Amen says, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation by God:
15 ‘I know your deeds, that you are neither cold nor hot. I wish you were cold or else hot.
16 So because you are lukewarm and neither hot nor cold, I am going to vomit you out of my mouth.
17 Because you say, “I am rich and have acquired riches and do not need anything at all,” but you do not know that you are miserable and pitiful and poor and blind and naked,
18 I advise you to buy from me gold refined by fire so that you may become rich, and white garments so that you may become dressed and that the shame of your nakedness may not be exposed, and eyesalve to rub in your eyes so that you may see.
19 “‘All those for whom I have affection, I reprove and discipline. So be zealous and repent.
20 Look! I am standing at the door and knocking. If anyone hears my voice and opens the door, I will come into his house and take the evening meal with him and he with me.
21 To the one who conquers I will grant to sit down with me on my throne, just as I conquered and sat down with my Father on his throne.
22 Let the one who has an ear hear what the spirit says to the congregations.’”
6 And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seven seals, and I heard one of the four living creatures say with a voice like thunder: “Come!”
2 And I saw, and look! a white horse, and the one seated on it had a bow; and a crown was given him, and he went out conquering and to complete his conquest.
3 When he opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature say: “Come!”
4 Another came out, a fiery-colored horse, and it was granted to the one seated on it to take peace away from the earth so that they should slaughter one another, and he was given a great sword.
5 When he opened the third seal, I heard the third living creature say: “Come!” And I saw, and look! a black horse, and the one seated on it had a pair of scales in his hand.
6 I heard what sounded like a voice in the midst of the four living creatures say: “A quart of wheat for a de·narʹi·us and three quarts of barley for a de·narʹi·us; and do not harm the olive oil and the wine.”
7 When he opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth living creature say: “Come!”
8 And I saw, and look! a pale horse, and the one seated on it had the name Death. And the Grave was closely following him. And authority was given them over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with a long sword and with food shortage and with deadly plague and by the wild beasts of the earth.
9 When he opened the fifth seal, I saw underneath the altar the souls of those slaughtered because of the word of God and because of the witness they had given.
10 They shouted with a loud voice, saying: “Until when, Sovereign Lord, holy and true, are you refraining from judging and avenging our blood on those who dwell on the earth?”
11 And a white robe was given to each of them, and they were told to rest a little while longer, until the number was filled of their fellow slaves and their brothers who were about to be killed as they had been.
12 And I saw when he opened the sixth seal, and a great earthquake occurred; and the sun became black as sackcloth made of hair, and the entire moon became as blood,
13 and the stars of heaven fell to the earth as when a fig tree shaken by a high wind drops its unripe figs.
14 And the heaven departed as a scroll that is being rolled up, and every mountain and every island was removed from its place.
15 Then the kings of the earth, the high officials, the military commanders, the rich, the strong, every slave, and every free person hid in the caves and among the rocks of the mountains.
16 And they keep saying to the mountains and to the rocks: “Fall over us and hide us from the face of the One seated on the throne and from the wrath of the Lamb,
17 because the great day of their wrath has come, and who is able to stand?”
7 After this I saw four angels standing on the four corners of the earth, holding tight the four winds of the earth, so that no wind could blow on the earth or on the sea or on any tree.
2 And I saw another angel ascending from the sunrise, having a seal of the living God; and he called with a loud voice to the four angels to whom it was granted to harm the earth and the sea,
3 saying: “Do not harm the earth or the sea or the trees, until after we have sealed the slaves of our God in their foreheads.”
4 And I heard the number of those who were sealed, 144,000, sealed out of every tribe of the sons of Israel:
5 Out of the tribe of Judah 12,000 sealed; out of the tribe of Reuʹben 12,000; out of the tribe of Gad 12,000;
6 out of the tribe of Ashʹer 12,000; out of the tribe of Naphʹta·li 12,000; out of the tribe of Ma·nasʹseh 12,000;
7 out of the tribe of Simʹe·on 12,000; out of the tribe of Leʹvi 12,000; out of the tribe of Isʹsa·char 12,000;
8 out of the tribe of Zebʹu·lun 12,000; out of the tribe of Joseph 12,000; out of the tribe of Benjamin 12,000 sealed.
9 After this I saw, and look! a great crowd, which no man was able to number, out of all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, dressed in white robes; and there were palm branches in their hands.
10 And they keep shouting with a loud voice, saying: “Salvation we owe to our God, who is seated on the throne, and to the Lamb.”
11 All the angels were standing around the throne and the elders and the four living creatures, and they fell facedown before the throne and worshipped God,
12 saying: “Amen! Let the praise and the glory and the wisdom and the thanksgiving and the honor and the power and the strength be to our God forever and ever. Amen.”
13 In response one of the elders said to me: “These who are dressed in the white robes, who are they and where did they come from?”
14 So right away I said to him: “My lord, you are the one who knows.” And he said to me: “These are the ones who come out of the great tribulation, and they have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.
15 That is why they are before the throne of God, and they are rendering him sacred service day and night in his temple; and the One seated on the throne will spread his tent over them.
16 They will hunger no more nor thirst anymore, neither will the sun beat down on them nor any scorching heat,
17 because the Lamb, who is in the midst of the throne, will shepherd them and will guide them to springs of waters of life. And God will wipe out every tear from their eyes.”
8 When he opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven for about half an hour.
2 And I saw the seven angels who stand before God, and seven trumpets were given to them.
3 Another angel, holding a golden incense vessel, arrived and stood at the altar, and a large quantity of incense was given him to offer it with the prayers of all the holy ones on the golden altar that was before the throne.
4 The smoke of the incense from the hand of the angel ascended with the prayers of the holy ones before God.
5 But right away the angel took the incense vessel, and he filled it with some of the fire of the altar and hurled it to the earth. And there were thunders and voices and flashes of lightning and an earthquake.
6 And the seven angels with the seven trumpets prepared to blow them.
7 The first one blew his trumpet. And there was hail and fire mingled with blood, and it was hurled to the earth; and a third of the earth was burned up, and a third of the trees were burned up, and all the green vegetation was burned up.
8 The second angel blew his trumpet. And something like a great mountain burning with fire was hurled into the sea. And a third of the sea became blood;
9 and a third of the living creatures in the sea died, and a third of the ships were wrecked.
10 The third angel blew his trumpet. And a great star burning like a lamp fell from heaven, and it fell on a third of the rivers and on the springs of waters.
11 The name of the star is Wormwood. And a third of the waters turned into wormwood, and many of the people died from the waters, because these had been made bitter.
12 The fourth angel blew his trumpet. And a third of the sun was struck and a third of the moon and a third of the stars, in order that a third of them might be darkened and the day might not have light for a third of it, and the night likewise.
13 And I saw, and I heard an eagle flying in midheaven say with a loud voice: “Woe, woe, woe to those dwelling on the earth because of the rest of the trumpet blasts of the three angels who are about to blow their trumpets!”
9 The fifth angel blew his trumpet. And I saw a star that had fallen from heaven to the earth, and the key to the shaft of the abyss was given to him.
2 He opened the shaft of the abyss, and smoke ascended out of the shaft like the smoke of a great furnace, and the sun was darkened, also the air, by the smoke of the shaft.
3 And locusts came out of the smoke onto the earth, and authority was given to them, the same authority that the scorpions of the earth have.
4 They were told not to harm the vegetation of the earth or any green plant or any tree, but only those people who do not have the seal of God on their foreheads.
5 And it was granted the locusts, not to kill them, but to torment them five months, and their torment was like torment by a scorpion when it strikes a person.
6 In those days people will seek death but will by no means find it, and they will long to die, but death will flee from them.
7 And in appearance the locusts resembled horses prepared for battle; on their heads were what seemed to be crowns of gold, and their faces were like human faces,
8 but they had hair like women’s hair. And their teeth were like those of lions,
9 and they had breastplates like iron breastplates. And the sound of their wings was like the sound of horse-drawn chariots rushing into battle.
10 Also, they have tails with stingers like scorpions, and in their tails is their authority to hurt the people for five months.
11 They have over them a king, the angel of the abyss. In Hebrew his name is A·badʹdon, but in Greek he has the name A·polʹlyon.
12 The one woe is past. Look! Two more woes are coming after these things.
13 The sixth angel blew his trumpet. And I heard one voice from the horns of the golden altar that is before God
14 say to the sixth angel who had the trumpet: “Untie the four angels who are bound at the great river Eu·phraʹtes.”
15 And the four angels who have been prepared for the hour and day and month and year were untied to kill a third of the people.
16 The number of the armies of cavalry was two myriads of myriads; I heard the number of them.
17 And this is how I saw the horses in the vision and those seated on them: They had fire-red and hyacinth-blue and sulfur-yellow breastplates, and the heads of the horses were like the heads of lions, and fire and smoke and sulfur came out of their mouths.
18 A third of the people were killed by these three plagues, by the fire and the smoke and the sulfur that came out of their mouths.
19 For the authority of the horses is in their mouths and in their tails, for their tails are like serpents and have heads, and with these they inflict harm.
20 But the rest of the people who were not killed by these plagues did not repent of the works of their hands; they did not stop worshipping the demons and the idols of gold and silver and copper and stone and wood, which can neither see nor hear nor walk.
21 And they did not repent of their murders nor of their spiritistic practices nor of their sexual immorality nor of their thefts.
10 And I saw another strong angel descending from heaven, arrayed with a cloud, and a rainbow was on his head, and his face was like the sun, and his legs were like pillars of fire,
2 and he had in his hand a little scroll that had been unrolled. And he set his right foot on the sea, but his left one on the earth,
3 and he cried out with a loud voice just as when a lion roars. And when he cried out, the voices of the seven thunders spoke.
4 Now when the seven thunders spoke, I was about to write, but I heard a voice out of heaven say: “Seal up the things the seven thunders spoke, and do not write them down.”
5 The angel whom I saw standing on the sea and on the earth raised his right hand to heaven,
6 and he swore by the One who lives forever and ever, who created the heaven and the things in it and the earth and the things in it and the sea and the things in it: “There will be no delay any longer.
7 But in the days when the seventh angel is about to blow his trumpet, the sacred secret that God declared as good news to his own slaves the prophets is indeed brought to a finish.”
8 And I heard the voice out of heaven speaking again with me and saying: “Go, take the opened scroll that is in the hand of the angel who is standing on the sea and on the earth.”
9 I went to the angel and told him to give me the little scroll. He said to me: “Take it and eat it up, and it will make your stomach bitter, but in your mouth it will be sweet like honey.”
10 I took the little scroll out of the hand of the angel and ate it, and in my mouth it was sweet like honey, but when I had eaten it, my stomach was made bitter.
11 And they said to me: “You must prophesy again about peoples and nations and tongues and many kings.”
14 Then I saw, and look! the Lamb standing on Mount Zion, and with him 144,000 who have his name and the name of his Father written on their foreheads.
2 I heard a sound coming out of heaven like the sound of many waters and like the sound of loud thunder; and the sound that I heard was like singers who accompany themselves by playing on their harps.
3 And they are singing what seems to be a new song before the throne and before the four living creatures and the elders, and no one was able to master that song except the 144,000, who have been bought from the earth.
4 These are the ones who did not defile themselves with women; in fact, they are virgins. These are the ones who keep following the Lamb no matter where he goes. These were bought from among mankind as firstfruits to God and to the Lamb,
5 and no deceit was found in their mouths; they are without blemish.
6 And I saw another angel flying in midheaven, and he had everlasting good news to declare to those who dwell on the earth, to every nation and tribe and tongue and people.
7 He was saying in a loud voice: “Fear God and give him glory, because the hour of judgment by him has arrived, so worship the One who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and the springs of water.”
8 Another, a second angel, followed, saying: “She has fallen! Babylon the Great has fallen, she who made all the nations drink of the wine of the passion of her sexual immorality!”
9 Another angel, a third, followed them, saying in a loud voice: “If anyone worships the wild beast and its image and receives a mark on his forehead or on his hand,
10 he will also drink of the wine of the anger of God that is poured out undiluted into the cup of His wrath, and he will be tormented with fire and sulfur in the sight of the holy angels and in the sight of the Lamb.
11 And the smoke of their torment ascends forever and ever, and day and night they have no rest, those who worship the wild beast and its image and whoever receives the mark of its name.
12 Here is where it calls for endurance on the part of the holy ones, those who keep the commandments of God and hold fast to the faith of Jesus.”
13 And I heard a voice out of heaven say, “Write: Happy are the dead who die in union with the Lord from this time onward. Yes, says the spirit, let them rest from their labors, for the things they did go right with them.”
14 Then I saw, and look! a white cloud, and seated on the cloud was someone like a son of man, with a golden crown on his head and a sharp sickle in his hand.
15 Another angel emerged from the temple sanctuary, calling with a loud voice to the one seated on the cloud: “Put your sickle in and reap, because the hour has come to reap, for the harvest of the earth is fully ripe.”
16 And the one seated on the cloud thrust his sickle into the earth, and the earth was reaped.
17 And still another angel emerged from the temple sanctuary that is in heaven, and he also had a sharp sickle.
18 And still another angel emerged from the altar, and he had authority over the fire. And he called out with a loud voice to the one who had the sharp sickle, saying: “Put your sharp sickle in and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth, for its grapes have become ripe.”
19 The angel thrust his sickle into the earth and gathered the vine of the earth, and he hurled it into the great winepress of God’s anger.
20 The winepress was trodden outside the city, and blood came out of the winepress as high up as the bridles of the horses for a distance of 1,600 stadia.
15 And I saw in heaven another sign, great and wonderful, seven angels with seven plagues. These are the last ones, because by means of them the anger of God is brought to a finish.
2 And I saw something like a sea of glass mingled with fire, and those who are victorious over the wild beast and its image and the number of its name were standing by the sea of glass, holding harps of God.
3 They were singing the song of Moses the slave of God and the song of the Lamb, saying: “Great and wonderful are your works, Jehovah God, the Almighty. Righteous and true are your ways, King of eternity.
4 Who will not really fear you, Jehovah, and glorify your name, for you alone are loyal? For all the nations will come and worship before you, because your righteous decrees have been revealed.”
5 After this I saw, and the sanctuary of the tent of the witness was opened in heaven,
6 and the seven angels with the seven plagues emerged from the sanctuary, clothed with clean, bright linen and with golden sashes wrapped around their chests.
7 One of the four living creatures gave the seven angels seven golden bowls that were full of the anger of God, who lives forever and ever.
8 And the sanctuary became filled with smoke because of the glory of God and because of his power, and no one was able to enter the sanctuary until the seven plagues of the seven angels were finished.
16 And I heard a loud voice out of the sanctuary say to the seven angels: “Go and pour out the seven bowls of the anger of God on the earth.”
2 The first one went off and poured out his bowl on the earth. And a hurtful and malignant ulcer afflicted the people who had the mark of the wild beast and who were worshipping its image.
3 The second one poured out his bowl into the sea. And it became blood like that of a dead man, and every living creature died, yes, the things in the sea.
4 The third one poured out his bowl into the rivers and the springs of water. And they became blood.
5 I heard the angel over the waters say: “You, the One who is and who was, the loyal One, are righteous, for you have issued these judgments,
6 because they poured out the blood of holy ones and of prophets, and you have given them blood to drink; they deserve it.”
7 And I heard the altar say: “Yes, Jehovah God, the Almighty, true and righteous are your judgments.”
8 The fourth one poured out his bowl on the sun, and to the sun it was granted to scorch the people with fire.
9 And the people were scorched by the great heat, but they blasphemed the name of God, who has the authority over these plagues, and they did not repent and give glory to him.
10 The fifth one poured out his bowl on the throne of the wild beast. And its kingdom became darkened, and they began to gnaw their tongues because of their pain,
11 but they blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and their ulcers, and they did not repent of their works.
12 The sixth one poured out his bowl on the great river Eu·phraʹtes, and its water was dried up to prepare the way for the kings from the rising of the sun.
13 And I saw three unclean inspired expressions that looked like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon and out of the mouth of the wild beast and out of the mouth of the false prophet.
14 They are, in fact, expressions inspired by demons and they perform signs, and they go out to the kings of the entire inhabited earth, to gather them together to the war of the great day of God the Almighty.
15 “Look! I am coming as a thief. Happy is the one who stays awake and keeps his outer garments, so that he may not walk naked and people look upon his shamefulness.”
16 And they gathered them together to the place that is called in Hebrew Armageddon.
17 The seventh one poured out his bowl on the air. At this a loud voice came out of the sanctuary from the throne, saying: “It has come to pass!”
18 And there were flashes of lightning and voices and thunders, and there was a great earthquake unlike any that had occurred since men came to be on the earth, so extensive and so great was the earthquake.
19 The great city split into three parts, and the cities of the nations fell; and Babylon the Great was remembered before God, to give her the cup of the wine of the fury of his wrath.
20 Also, every island fled, and mountains were not found.
21 Then great hailstones, each about the weight of a talent, fell from heaven on the people, and the people blasphemed God because of the plague of hail, for the plague was unusually great.
17 One of the seven angels who had the seven bowls came and said to me: “Come, I will show you the judgment on the great prostitute who sits on many waters,
2 with whom the kings of the earth committed sexual immorality, and earth’s inhabitants were made drunk with the wine of her sexual immorality.”
3 And he carried me away in the power of the spirit into a wilderness. And I saw a woman sitting on a scarlet-colored wild beast that was full of blasphemous names and that had seven heads and ten horns.
4 The woman was clothed in purple and scarlet, and she was adorned with gold and precious stones and pearls, and she had in her hand a golden cup that was full of disgusting things and the unclean things of her sexual immorality.
5 On her forehead was written a name, a mystery: “Babylon the Great, the mother of the prostitutes and of the disgusting things of the earth.”
6 And I saw that the woman was drunk with the blood of the holy ones and with the blood of the witnesses of Jesus. Well, on seeing her I was greatly amazed.
7 So the angel said to me: “Why is it that you were amazed? I will tell you the mystery of the woman and of the wild beast that is carrying her and that has the seven heads and the ten horns:
8 The wild beast that you saw was, but is not, and yet is about to ascend out of the abyss, and it is to go off into destruction. And the inhabitants of the earth—those whose names have not been written in the scroll of life from the founding of the world—will be amazed when they see how the wild beast was, but is not, and yet will be present.
9 “This calls for a mind that has wisdom: The seven heads mean seven mountains, where the woman sits on top.
10 And there are seven kings: Five have fallen, one is, and the other has not yet arrived; but when he does arrive, he must remain a short while.
11 And the wild beast that was but is not, it is also an eighth king, but it springs from the seven, and it goes off into destruction.
12 “The ten horns that you saw mean ten kings who have not yet received a kingdom, but they do receive authority as kings for one hour with the wild beast.
13 These have one thought, so they give their power and authority to the wild beast.
14 These will battle with the Lamb, but because he is Lord of lords and King of kings, the Lamb will conquer them. Also, those with him who are called and chosen and faithful will do so.”
15 He said to me: “The waters that you saw, where the prostitute is sitting, mean peoples and crowds and nations and tongues.
16 And the ten horns that you saw and the wild beast, these will hate the prostitute and will make her devastated and naked, and they will eat up her flesh and completely burn her with fire.
17 For God put it into their hearts to carry out his thought, yes, to carry out their one thought by giving their kingdom to the wild beast, until the words of God will have been accomplished.
18 And the woman whom you saw means the great city that has a kingdom over the kings of the earth.”
18 After this I saw another angel descending from heaven with great authority, and the earth was illuminated by his glory.
2 And he cried out with a strong voice, saying: “She has fallen! Babylon the Great has fallen, and she has become a dwelling place of demons and a place where every unclean spirit and every unclean and hated bird lurks!
3 For because of the wine of the passion of her sexual immorality, all the nations have fallen victim, and the kings of the earth committed sexual immorality with her, and the merchants of the earth became rich owing to the power of her shameless luxury.”
4 And I heard another voice out of heaven say: “Get out of her, my people, if you do not want to share with her in her sins, and if you do not want to receive part of her plagues.
5 For her sins have massed together clear up to heaven, and God has called her acts of injustice to mind.
6 Repay her in the way she treated others, yes, pay her back double for the things she has done; in the cup she has mixed, mix a double portion for her.
7 To the extent that she glorified herself and lived in shameless luxury, to that extent give her torment and mourning. For she keeps saying in her heart: ‘I sit as queen, and I am not a widow, and I will never see mourning.’
8 That is why in one day her plagues will come, death and mourning and famine, and she will be completely burned with fire, because Jehovah God, who judged her, is strong.
9 “And the kings of the earth who committed sexual immorality with her and lived with her in shameless luxury will weep and beat themselves in grief over her when they see the smoke from her burning.
10 They will stand at a distance because of their fear of her torment and say: ‘Too bad, too bad, you great city, Babylon you strong city, because in one hour your judgment has arrived!’
11 “Also, the merchants of the earth are weeping and mourning over her, because there is no one to buy their full cargo anymore,
12 a full cargo of gold, silver, precious stones, pearls, fine linen, purple cloth, silk, and scarlet cloth; and everything made from scented wood; and every sort of object made from ivory, and from precious wood, copper, iron, and marble;
13 also cinnamon, Indian spice, incense, perfumed oil, frankincense, wine, olive oil, fine flour, wheat, cattle, sheep, horses, carriages, slaves, and human lives.
14 Yes, the fine fruit that you desired has left you, and all the delicacies and the splendid things have vanished from you, never to be found again.
15 “The merchants who sold these things, who became rich from her, will stand at a distance because of their fear of her torment and will weep and mourn,
16 saying: ‘Too bad, too bad, the great city, clothed with fine linen, purple, and scarlet and richly adorned with gold ornaments, precious stones, and pearls,
17 because in one hour such great riches have been devastated!’ “And every ship captain and every seafaring person and sailors and all those who make a living by the sea stood at a distance
18 and cried out as they looked at the smoke from her burning and said: ‘What city is like the great city?’
19 They threw dust on their heads and cried out, weeping and mourning, and said: ‘Too bad, too bad, the great city, in which all those who had ships at sea became rich from her wealth, because in one hour she has been devastated!’
20 “Be glad over her, O heaven, also you holy ones and apostles and prophets, because God has pronounced his judgment on her in your behalf!”
21 And a strong angel lifted up a stone like a great millstone and hurled it into the sea, saying: “Thus with a swift pitch will Babylon the great city be hurled down, and she will never be found again.
22 And the sound of singers who accompany themselves on the harp, of musicians, of flutists, and of trumpeters will never be heard in you again. And no craftsman who practices any trade will ever be found in you again, and no sound of a millstone will ever be heard in you again.
23 No light of a lamp will ever shine in you again, and no voice of a bridegroom and of a bride will ever be heard in you again; for your merchants were the top-ranking men of the earth, and by your spiritistic practices all the nations were misled.
24 Yes, in her was found the blood of prophets and of holy ones and of all those who have been slaughtered on the earth.”
20 And I saw an angel coming down out of heaven with the key of the abyss and a great chain in his hand.
2 He seized the dragon, the original serpent, who is the Devil and Satan, and bound him for 1,000 years.
3 And he hurled him into the abyss and shut it and sealed it over him, so that he would not mislead the nations anymore until the 1,000 years were ended. After this he must be released for a little while.
4 And I saw thrones, and those who sat on them were given authority to judge. Yes, I saw the souls of those executed for the witness they gave about Jesus and for speaking about God, and those who had not worshipped the wild beast or its image and had not received the mark on their forehead and on their hand. And they came to life and ruled as kings with the Christ for 1,000 years.
5 (The rest of the dead did not come to life until the 1,000 years were ended.) This is the first resurrection.
6 Happy and holy is anyone having part in the first resurrection; over these the second death has no authority, but they will be priests of God and of the Christ, and they will rule as kings with him for the 1,000 years.
7 Now as soon as the 1,000 years have ended, Satan will be released from his prison,
8 and he will go out to mislead those nations in the four corners of the earth, Gog and Maʹgog, to gather them together for the war. The number of these is as the sand of the sea.
9 And they advanced over the whole earth and encircled the camp of the holy ones and the beloved city. But fire came down out of heaven and consumed them.
10 And the Devil who was misleading them was hurled into the lake of fire and sulfur, where both the wild beast and the false prophet already were; and they will be tormented day and night forever and ever.
11 And I saw a great white throne and the One seated on it. From before him the earth and the heaven fled away, and no place was found for them.
12 And I saw the dead, the great and the small, standing before the throne, and scrolls were opened. But another scroll was opened; it is the scroll of life. The dead were judged out of those things written in the scrolls according to their deeds.
13 And the sea gave up the dead in it, and death and the Grave gave up the dead in them, and they were judged individually according to their deeds.
14 And death and the Grave were hurled into the lake of fire. This means the second death, the lake of fire.
15 Furthermore, whoever was not found written in the book of life was hurled into the lake of fire.